---
layout: minutes
date: 2020-10-15
title: EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — 2020-10-15
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": "https://schema.org/",
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020-10-15-epub",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2020-10-15",
        "datePublished": "2020-10-16",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
            "startDate": "2020-10-15",
            "endDate": "2020-10-15",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Wendy Reid"
                        },
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Shinya Takami (高見真也)"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Dave Cramer"
                        },
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Wendy Reid"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Toshiaki Koike"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Masakazu Kitahara"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Matthew Chan"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Laura Brady"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Zheng Xu (徐征)"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Teenya Franklin"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Brady Duga"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Marisa DeMeglio"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Yu-Wei Chang (Yanni)"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ben Schroeter"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Jun’Ichi Yoshii"
                }
            ]
        }
    }
---

# EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc .draft_notice_needed}



**Date:** 2020-10-15

See also the [Agenda](https://www.w3.org/mid/2ECB2199-228C-4D6A-8207-29D9B938DE1D@rakuten.com) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2020/10/15-epub-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Wendy Reid, Toshiaki Koike, Masakazu Kitahara, Matthew Chan, Laura Brady, Zheng Xu (徐征), Teenya Franklin, Brady Duga, Marisa DeMeglio, Yu-Wei Chang (Yanni), Shinya Takami (高見真也), Ben Schroeter, Jun’Ichi Yoshii

**Regrets:** Daihei Shiohama (塩濱大平)

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Wendy Reid, Shinya Takami (高見真也)

**Scribe(s):** Dave Cramer, Wendy Reid

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---

**Wendy Reid:** if you are able to scribe, please let me know.  
… we need to equitably share the work  
… anyone new this week?  

### 1. media types
{: #section1}

**Wendy Reid:** we've talked a lot about media types  
… we'll talk about a few other media types today  
… it would be good to have for criteria for adding new media types  
… we've done this accidentally  
… we want broad support across all major browsers  
… we want a strong use case from the publishing industry  
… we mentioned this in one of Matt's pull requests  

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/publ-epub-revision/pull/1345](https://github.com/w3c/publ-epub-revision/pull/1345)

**Wendy Reid:** what should the criteria be for adding new media types? What are our requirements?  

**Dave Cramer:** It's straightforward to say a media-type is supported by all major browsers and operating systems  
… and the promise of being supported by all major reading systems  
… query RS developers from around the world on their thoughts  
… universality and support is important  

**Zheng Xu (徐征):** I was going to ask... what is the benefit for a core media type?  
… I raised the question in epubcheck  
… making it easy to load something in OPF  
… what is purpose of core media type?  
… if a RS is using a browser engine, the media type is decided by browser.  
… browsers don't define that  
… but some reading systems are not based on web browsers  
… I don't quite understand if this is necessary for us to define  

**Shinya Takami (高見真也):** (speaking in Japanese)  

**Toshiaki Koike:** (speaking in Japanese)  

**Shinya Takami (高見真也):** I asked about RS in Japan  
… toshiakikoike said, their RS converts EPUB files in advance to deliver browser view  
… adding core media types is not a big issue  

> *Brady Duga:* Yes

**Wendy Reid:** as long as we meet the criteria that it is supported (or almost supported) by all major browsers and operating systems  
… we'll talk about WebP, which is supported everywhere but versions of MacOS before the most recent  
… they have to be quite well supported at the time  
… we will have to test, of course  
… reading systems would need to commit to support, and we'd see that in testing  
… the two issues... one is logged a couple days ago  

#### 1.1. WebP and VTT as media types
{: #section1-1}

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/publ-epub-revision/issues/1344](https://github.com/w3c/publ-epub-revision/issues/1344)

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/publ-epub-revision/issues/1299](https://github.com/w3c/publ-epub-revision/issues/1299)

**Wendy Reid:** caniuse looks good for WebP  
… supported in Big Sur, which is out soon (?)  
… the argument is a more efficient image format  
… DeMarque feels it significantly reduces the overall size of their EPUBs  
… which is good  
… the other possible CMT is VTT,  
… used for video captions  

**Marisa DeMeglio:** if we had web vtt as a core type  

**Wendy Reid:** it's text vtt  

**Marisa DeMeglio:** does it accompany the video?  

**Wendy Reid:** the mystery is how we refer to videos; we don't have a CMT for video  
… it would accompany whatever video format you were using  

**Shinya Takami (高見真也):** (speaks in Japanese)  
… I discussed both of these with Mr. Koike... we don't know what impact they would have on RSs  

**Brady Duga:** Matt seems to think a fallback isn't needed in this case?  
… since VTT is itself a fallback for the track element?  
… do we really need to do anything other than clarifying the manifest section  

**Wendy Reid:** that's a task on it's own  

**Brady Duga:** that's why we have matt :)  
… you don't need a fallback for a foreign resource in this case  
… so it might make it confusing to have it as a CMT  

**Dave Cramer:** This is the perfect opportunity to mention that CMT doesn't mean that something can be a spine item  
… Content Docs can be spine items, but CMTs mean they don't need a fallback  
… a RS would be assured of finding something to display  

**Brady Duga:** that's a good point, but you could put vtt in an object tag :)  
… the real problem is, if we required a fallback for VTT, there isn't one.  
… so you couldn't use VTT. There's not a format that would work instead. You can't replace it with HTML.  
… I'm assuming it has time-based features.  
… if it does require a fallback, we should make it a CMT. If it doesn't require a fallback, there's no point.  
… thumbs up to WebP  

**Shinya Takami (高見真也):** how about adding 2nd-priority CMT  
… maybe JPEG/PNG is already popular  
… webp and opus are new technologies, maybe there should be fallbacks  

**Zheng Xu (徐征):** If a CMT can be a spine item...  
… what is the core media type we wanted to define to have benefit for end user  
… we can use it as content doc without fallback  
… if CMT does not have this purpose, even some mimetype can be used as CMT but can't be put in spine item  
… how do we use this scope?  
… like web browser we have caniuse  
… if we have something like caniuse for reading systems  
… but if some reading system can't support webp, it's a reading system problem  
… we need to draw a line for CMT to ask creator to add fallback  
… it's still a question for me  

**Wendy Reid:** it's a fair question  
… having tests will help  
… as we discussed earlier, do we throw away the idea of CMT, and the consensus was we didn't want to do that.  
… this puts a lot of pressure on content creators, and leads to interop problems.  

**Brady Duga:** re: fallbacks for webp and opus  
… defeats the whole purpose, which is to make your EPUB smaller  
… so that's why you want to extend CMTs  
… a size benefit  
… we can add to our list of reasons: Is there a benefit you cannot achieve with existing core media types  
… the answer for both WebP and Opus is that they are smaller.  
… we have opened things up, it was called FXL  
… we have insane hacks that downloads Times New Roman so that it can match fruit company's rendering  
… free-form content makes it hard to support lots of things  
… we also don't have enough people to make caniuse for epub work  

**Zheng Xu (徐征):** caniuse for RS... I know it would take a while  
… they have more content creators  
… we have smaller scope of user  
… say user wanted to use some type of... do whatever you want  
… use any font, but it might break FXL... sure  
… if we can define certain type... with web browsers people only test in 3 browsers  
… for reading systems it's not the same  
… we have too many types of reading systems  
… as RS creator, if we cannot support it, we can put our support status in caniuse  
… it's kind of more use-case driven  
… if we draw a line here,  
… how can create a fallback for it?  
… this fallback blocks creator from using this feature  
… it's not possible to create fallback  
… I think purpose of creator and spec and RS  
… expand it, let it be more easy to use  

**Dave Cramer:** I would just remind everyone we tried to do caniuse for EPUB and it failed epically  
… there's a handful of major browsers, and hundreds of reading systems  
… which all behave differently on different platforms  
… the volunteers could never keep up  
… we failed at trying to keep up with it and maintain  
… we need more marisas  

**Marisa DeMeglio:** you took the words out of my mouth  
… I developed the site  

> *Marisa DeMeglio:* [https://daisy.github.io/old-epub3-support-grid/features/](https://daisy.github.io/old-epub3-support-grid/features/)

**Marisa DeMeglio:** keeping it up to date was not possible  
… we relied on volunteer testers; the tests were not automated  
… even though we had some provisions to make it easier  
… the rate at which reading systems were changing required too much retesting  
… a couple of months ago, BISG asked me to put the static site back  
… i've put it back  
… link ^^^  
… this only scratches the surface  
… but this is what we tried to do for caniuse for epub  

**Zheng Xu (徐征):** I understand; I respect the amount of work required  
… two things  
… one, in terms of caniuse or test  
… if it needed to be maintained by each RS  
… publishers would know how to create content for a RS  
… we might have more than a hundred reading systems. No 3rd party can do that.  
… webp... based on the current track, it's hard to add more to CMT  
… what is benefit of having this CMT?  
… we have spec, we have 3.3 that defines that webp must be CMT  
… but we have a RS that does not support this  
… that is a problem  

**Wendy Reid:** we have to get back to the core of the core of the talk about core media types  
… it sounds like we have consensus on criteria  
… they need overwhelming support by browsers and operating systems, with a path to completion  
… and they need a direct benefit to content creators and/or reading systems  
… based on those criteria, let's start with WebP  
… I'll put in a proposal  

> **Proposed resolution: Add WebP as a core media type in EPUB 3.3** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Brady Duga:* +2 (1 for me, 1 for Garth)

> *Teenya Franklin:* 0

> *Laura Brady:* 0

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* +1

> *Matthew Chan:* +1

> *Marisa DeMeglio:* +1

> *Zheng Xu (徐征):* +1

> *Yu-Wei Chang (Yanni):* +1

> *Ben Schroeter:* 0

> *Wendy Reid:* +1

> ***Resolution #1: Add WebP as a core media type in EPUB 3.3***
{: #resolution1 .resolution}

**Wendy Reid:** I can't make a strong case for VTT  

**Dave Cramer:** I don't think we should vote on this right now  
… it might not need to be a CMT  
… it should be available in EPUB  
… let's figure out how to do that  

### 2. AOB
{: #section2}

**Wendy Reid:** that's all I have for today  
… thanks to everyone who attended the joint meeting with APA/Silver  
… next week's meeting will be our not-face to not-face  
… we'll do two meetings  
… both meetings will be 3.5 hours with breaks  
… we're finalizing agendas now  
… we'll talk about testing, fxl a11y, some contentious github issues, etc.  
… be prepared to see the agenda early next week  
… please volunteer to scribe, we will need multiple scribes per session  
… anything else?  

**Zheng Xu (徐征):** the CG will have the first meeting next week  
… do we want to try caniuse for ereader again, run by the community group?  

**Wendy Reid:** that's Wednesday  

**Marisa DeMeglio:** 21st?  
… Publishing CG?  
… I'll try to be there.  

**Wendy Reid:** if that's everything, I'll let everyone get to their workday, worknight, or whatever.  
… see y'all next week at eTPAC.  
… stay positive and test negative :)  

**rrsagent:** make logs public  

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* Funny Japanese :)

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* Yes!

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* See you next week!

---


### 3. Resolutions
{: #res}

* [Resolution #1](#resolution1): Add WebP as a core media type in EPUB 3.3
