---
layout: minutes
date: 2020-12-11
title: EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — 2020-12-11
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": "https://schema.org/",
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020-12-11-epub",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2020-12-11",
        "datePublished": "2020-12-11",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
            "startDate": "2020-12-11",
            "endDate": "2020-12-11",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Wendy Reid"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Matthew Chan"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Zheng Xu (徐征)"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Masakazu Kitahara"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Toshiaki Koike"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ben Schroeter"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Shinya Takami (高見真也)"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Marisa DeMeglio"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Brady Duga"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Garth Conboy"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Yutaka Suzuki"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Dave Cramer"
                }
            ]
        }
    }
---

# EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc .draft_notice_needed}



**Date:** 2020-12-11

See also the [Agenda](https://www.w3.org/mid/HK0PR03MB477252B1B1DC71C6E4E02B0F92CC0@HK0PR03MB4772.apcprd03.prod.outlook.com) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2020/12/11-epub-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Zheng Xu (徐征), Matthew Chan, Wendy Reid, Masakazu Kitahara, Toshiaki Koike, Ben Schroeter, Shinya Takami (高見真也), Marisa DeMeglio, Brady Duga, Garth Conboy, Yutaka Suzuki

**Regrets:** Jun’Ichi Yoshii, Daihei Shiohama (塩濱大平), Nellie McKesson, Ivan Herman

**Guests:** Dave Cramer

**Chair:** Wendy Reid

**Scribe(s):** Matthew Chan

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


> *Matthew Chan:* Topic 1: Multiple Renditions.

_See github issue [#1436](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1436)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1436 -->



_See github pull request [#1438](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/pull/1438)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1438 -->



**Wendy Reid:** this is continuing the discussion from last week.  
… the suggestion is to remove references to multiple renditions from the main document of the spec.  

**Dave Cramer:** the possibility of multiple renditions has always been in epub.  
… but has not achieve a lot of uptake.  
… i'm not aware of any major RS that supports it.  
… with those references in the spec, the precision of the language required becomes cumbersome.  
… it also gives casual readers of the spec the impression that multiple renditions is more prevalent than it is.  
… Matt G's idea is to have those references to multiple rendition moved from where they currently are (scattered throughout the spec) into a satellite document.  
… Matt G has already started this process of editorializing the spec.  
… the satellite would be a WG note, and not a Rec track document.  

**Garth Conboy:** there is at least one RS that supports it, so it makes sense to still keep multiple rendition functionality in the spec.  
… that's why I am in favor of Matt G's direction.  

**Shinya Takami (高見真也):** multiple renditions are currently used in Japan, mostly for educational purposes.  
… but I agree with moving the multiple rendition specific portion of the spec to a separate document as long as this means that multiple renditions are not deprecated.  

**Dave Cramer:** Readium also had some support for multiple renditions.  
… at the time Microsoft was working on epub support in Edge.  
… as part of that process, they found some oddball things in the spec that they found confusing.  
… if another browser were to ask for advice on supporting epub today, I would recommend that they not support multiple renditions.  

**Marisa DeMeglio:** wish we could go back to 2008 and reverse the decision to support multiple renditions.  
… support is kind of mess right now.  

**Brady Duga:** the first thing that we tell you about epub in the spec is something about multiple renditions, I can see how that is confusing.  

> *Garth Conboy:* +1.

> **Proposed resolution: Remove mentions of multiple renditions from the core and reading systems documents, close issue #1436 and merge PR #1438.** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* +1.

> *Marisa DeMeglio:* +2.

> *Toshiaki Koike:* +1.

> *Garth Conboy:* +1.

> *Brady Duga:* +1.

> *Masakazu Kitahara:* +1.

> ***Resolution #1: Remove mentions of multiple renditions from the core and reading systems documents, close issue #1436 and merge PR #1438.***
{: #resolution1 .resolution}

**Wendy Reid:** to keep all the documents together, Ivan has proposed that we publish the multiple renditions piece as a note.  

**Dave Cramer:** here is a link to the old IDPF version.  

> *Dave Cramer:* See [Old IDPF Version of the multiple rendition spec](http://idpf.org/epub/renditions/multiple/).

> **Proposed resolution: Publish Multiple Renditions as a Working Group Note.** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Garth Conboy:* +1.

> *Matthew Chan:* +1.

> *Wendy Reid:* +1.

> *Marisa DeMeglio:* +1.

> *Brady Duga:* +1.

> *Ben Schroeter:* +1.

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* +1.

> *Masakazu Kitahara:* +1.

> ***Resolution #2: Publish Multiple Renditions as a Working Group Note.***
{: #resolution2 .resolution}

**Wendy Reid:** one of the other documents we have to publish is the overview note that ties everything together.  

> *Wendy Reid:* See [Draft Overview](https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/overview/index.html).

> **Proposed resolution: Publish Overview as a Working Group Note.** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Wendy Reid:* +1.

> *Brady Duga:* +1.

> *Toshiaki Koike:* +1.

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* +1.

**Wendy Reid:** this is the overview document that is the introduction to the spec.  

> *Masakazu Kitahara:* +1.

> *Matthew Chan:* +1.

> *Garth Conboy:* +1.

> ***Resolution #3: Publish Overview as a Working Group Note.***
{: #resolution3 .resolution}

### 1. External Content and iFrames 
{: #section1}

_See github issue [#1061.](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1061.)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1061. -->



**Wendy Reid:** the use case that brought this up was linking YouTube videos (or similar content) in textbooks.  

**Dave Cramer:** this is a complicated issue because it pulls us in 2 different directions.  
… one of the strengths of epub is that it is self-contained.  
… we've allowed this before with external fonts.  
… BUT this use case is reasonably compelling too so....  

**Marisa DeMeglio:** Has anyone given much thought to the relationship between fallbacks and external content?.  
… if you fallback to an image or transcript, or something like that that is easy to bundle, is that allowed?.  
… Matt G clarifies the distinction between foreign and external resources in the issue.  
… which is on point.  

**Dave Cramer:** one reason that we put this on the agenda was to get a sense of whether this use case is important in the Asian market.  
… has this limit frustrated Asian content authors.  

**Garth Conboy:** how far along are we to allowing video content without fallbacks? Are we already there?.  

**Wendy Reid:** in practice, i've seen video elements with external urls as href.  

**Brady Duga:** it feels like this is worse, because video and audio are limited in what you can do with them.  
… you could just make an epub shell that references your real book that exists in a totally separate website.  

**Dave Cramer:** yeah, it's a slippery slope.  

**Wendy Reid:** i'm pretty sure that in the wild i've seen youtube videos in ebooks (not that they work well/at all depending on the RS).  
… but what possible way do we have to distinguish a link to a video vs a completely different website.  

**Brady Duga:** we'd like to think that epubs are essentially web content, but there are lots of ways in which RS and browsers are different (e.g. security).  

**Ben Schroeter:** i think the fact that we've already seen this in the wild pushes me to err in favor of wider adoption, but also mitigate it in some way.  
… i.e. not recommend it.  
… but disallowing it entirely is problematic.  

**Brady Duga:** I'm not seeing youtube in ebooks.  

> *Dave Cramer:* [https://github.com/w3c/epubcheck/issues/852](https://github.com/w3c/epubcheck/issues/852).

**Wendy Reid:** the place i think it might happen more often is where size limitation come into play.  
… maybe its full of interviews or for whatever reason its full of videos.  
… if we wanted to cut the size from GBs back to MBs, one way is to link out to the videos.  

**Ben Schroeter:** I do see how it is a slippery slope, we should try to make that slope less slippery.  

**Dave Cramer:** there are a lot of moving pieces here... maybe some of us should revisit the issues in more detail, get the problem in better focus.  

**Brady Duga:** I'm thinking about the security implications of this, and we aren't ready for this.  
… I don't think many RS devs have consider external content as an attack vector.  
… we should talk to HTML people to understand what the risks are here.  
… the functionality of playing an externally hosted video in your epub already exists, but we need to better understand the risks of doing so.  

**Wendy Reid:** one of the things we should start thinking about is horizontal review.  
… one of those topics for review will be security and privacy.  

**Dave Cramer:** it sounds like we're not ready to resolve on this right now.  

**Wendy Reid:** agree.  

**Dave Cramer:** so we take it back to github for now.  

**Wendy Reid:** might be worth taking this to the business group? Asking e.g. if there is a need to make special provision for video in addition to what we already have..  
… next week will be our last meeting of 2020.  
… no meeting on week of 21st or 28th.  
… january 7th will be first meeting of 2021, at this same time (7 eastern).  

> *Dave Cramer:* RRSAgent: draft minutes.

> *Dave Cramer:* RRSAgent: bye.

---


### 2. Resolutions
{: #res}

* [Resolution #1](#resolution1): Remove mentions of multiple renditions from the core and reading systems documents, close issue #1436 and merge PR #1438.
* [Resolution #2](#resolution2): Publish Multiple Renditions as a Working Group Note.
* [Resolution #3](#resolution3): Publish Overview as a Working Group Note.
