---
layout: minutes
date: 2020-12-10
title: EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — 2020-12-10
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": "https://schema.org/",
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020-12-10-epub-a11y",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2020-12-10",
        "datePublished": "2020-12-11",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco",
            "startDate": "2020-12-10",
            "endDate": "2020-12-10",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Avneesh Singh"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Matthew Chan"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "George Kerscher"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Juliette McShane"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Laura Brady"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Charles LaPierre"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Bill Kasdorf"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Jun’Ichi Yoshii"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ben Schroeter"
                }
            ]
        }
    }
---

# EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}



**Date:** 2020-12-10

See also the [Agenda](https://www.w3.org/mid/83F0E40B77A74834AB45EA3EA25D2621@DESKTOPG923ARA) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2020/12/10-epub-a11y-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Avneesh Singh, George Kerscher, Juliette McShane, Matthew Chan, Laura Brady, Charles LaPierre, Bill Kasdorf, Jun’Ichi Yoshii, Ben Schroeter

**Regrets:** gregorio

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Avneesh Singh

**Scribe(s):** Matthew Chan

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


**Avneesh Singh:** this is the last call of the year.  
… today we have a bunch of issues from github to discuss.  

### 1. Alignment of NAV TOC with spine 
{: #section1}

_See github issue [#1430](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1430)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1430 -->



**Avneesh Singh:** alignment is no longer a requirement in EPUB spec 3.3.  
… however, it is recommended.  
… should alignment be added as requirement in a11y?.  

> *Matthew Chan:* .. after discussion in github, it seems we should not make this a requirement.

**Avneesh Singh:** maybe we can just add a warning at the toc is out of order?.  

**Charles LaPierre:** agreed. There are cases were TOC will not be in complete alignment.  
… when this is the case, the technique document should say to add this warning to the accessibility summary.  

**Avneesh Singh:** the technique should recommend that TOC should align with spine, unless there is a real need for it to not align.  
… and that there should be text in the TOC that conveys that the toc is out of order.  
… and a note in the accessibility summary.  

**George Kerscher:** how would adding a note to the nav TOC work?.  
… I would think that somewhere in the book, in the beginning, the presence of multiple TOCs would be explained.  
… like an explanation of how to use the book.  
… maybe this could be a best practice that we promote?.  
… and the accessibility summary would say, "this book is not meant to be read linearly, and there is text that explains how best to explore this book".  

**Avneesh Singh:** We can have the discussion about technique on a separate call. We'll give this proposal to Matt G, and he'll come back with the technique.  

**Charles LaPierre:** also, should we add something to the epub that exposes that sort of disclaimer text to the user as well?.  
… but then RS will have to implement that.  

**Avneesh Singh:** There could be a text in the TOC element itself, but this text wouldn't necessarily be displayed by RS where the TOC appears visually like an expandable tree.  

> **Proposed resolution: We are not having success criteria of aligning nav doc with spine, but we will have a technique for it..** *(Avneesh Singh)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Matthew Chan:* +1.

> *Laura Brady:* +1.

> *Charles LaPierre:* +1.

> *Juliette McShane:* +1.

> *Ben Schroeter:* +1.

> *Bill Kasdorf:* +1.

> *George Kerscher:* +1.

**Avneesh Singh:** I will discuss this will Dave and Wendy. Will open an issue about maybe having a flag to indicate lack of alignment.  

> *Jun’Ichi Yoshii:* +1.

### 2. Relaxed requirement of alt-text for description in a11y 1.0 
{: #section2}

_See github issue [#1441](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1441)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1441 -->



**Avneesh Singh:** if an image is complex, authors should be using long desc or extended desc.  
… we relaxed this requirement originally because we didn't want to overburden authors.  
… but over the past 4 years, a11y has come a long way.  

**Charles LaPierre:** for Benetech GCA, we're seeing all publishers and vendors embracing extended desc for complex images.  
… we're not getting push back.  

> *Bill Kasdorf:* That is really good to hear!!.

> **Proposed resolution: align requirement of text equivalent in EPUB accessibility with WCAG 2.x SC 1.1.1.** *(Avneesh Singh)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Matthew Chan:* +1.

> *Laura Brady:* +1.

> *Bill Kasdorf:* +1.

> *Ben Schroeter:* +1.

> *Charles LaPierre:* +1.

> *Jun’Ichi Yoshii:* +1.

> *George Kerscher:* +1.

> *Juliette McShane:* +1.

### 3. Clarify credentials need to be associated with certifier 
{: #section3}

_See github issue [#1410](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1410)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1410 -->



**Avneesh Singh:** credentials refine certifier, but this relationship is not clear in the spec.  
… Matt G suggested that we formalize this relationship.  

> *Matthew Chan:* Matt G's example [https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1410#issuecomment-724095290](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1410#issuecomment-724095290).

> **Proposed resolution: associate CertifiedBy with CertifierCredentials with refine.** *(Avneesh Singh)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Matthew Chan:* +1.

> *Charles LaPierre:* +1.

> *Ben Schroeter:* +1.

> *Juliette McShane:* +1.

> *Bill Kasdorf:* +1.

> *Jun’Ichi Yoshii:* +1.

> *George Kerscher:* +1.

> *Laura Brady:* +1.

### 4. Adding an icon for a certifier's credential 
{: #section4}

_See github issue [#1434](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1434)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1434 -->



**Charles LaPierre:** with GCA, we have 3 things: 1. GCA as text string, 2. Url to point to the page of the credential, 3. An icon or badge for certification.  
… potentially that badge could go somewhere inside the epub content, e.g. on the jacket.  
… and then the text string could be the alt-text for the badge.  
… we had this come up with VitalSource.  
… but we have to give them the notice to surface this info out of band.  
… it would be useful if this information could come from directly inside the epub.  

**George Kerscher:** what about if we create a new piece of metadata that is just a link to the badge?.  

**Charles LaPierre:** instead of having it just inside the epub?.  

**George Kerscher:** yes.  
… and then we could use the same refines technique.  

**Avneesh Singh:** where is the Url going right now Charles?.  

**Charles LaPierre:** right now it is going to a webpage that has the certification, with the publisher name, and the badge, etc..  
… but VitalSource doesn't want to have to go out to the webpage and look for where the badge is, etc..  

**Bill Kasdorf:** i'm open to these options, but from a production point of view, is that a GCA publisher would just put the badge on the copyright page.  
… so that badge might be in the book anyway.  

**Avneesh Singh:** Also, we've had issues with external content before, like when the cover was not part of the book.  
… if we are moving towards a direction where the badge is already part of the content of the book, and then we just point to it, then there is no problem.  
… but if the badge is just somewhere in the metadata, then this is more of an issue.  

**Ben Schroeter:** in general, i want to avoid tailoring metadata towards a specific use case.  
… the spec should be agnostic.  
… Bill, I don't think your suggestion is one that we're going to see come to fruition.  

**Bill Kasdorf:** ...and the a purchaser would have to have the book before the logo would be seen before they could but that logo on.  

**Ben Schroeter:** and plus, there are going to be non-accessible versions of the book too... like the PDF, or the print.  

**Bill Kasdorf:** right, i see how that is an issue.  

**Laura Brady:** As a publisher, we do put that GCA statement in all our books.  

**Charles LaPierre:** But the metadata in an epub version is specific to that version, right? It wouldn't be brought over to a PDF version.  
… so having the metadata pointing to an external image, or somewhere inside the epub are both options that seem equivalent to me.  
… why would one be a problem, and the other not?.  

**Avneesh Singh:** Okay, let's explore this more in the github issue and come back later for a resolution.  

**Charles LaPierre:** we could also do both: have 1 badge inside the content, and 1 in an external point URL.  

**Avneesh Singh:** Another point is that content in the epub will remain static over time. If there is a badge refresh, a URL method would keep everything consistent.  

**Charles LaPierre:** right, but then internet connection issues will impact an external file method....  

### 5. META-002: add `accessModeSufficient=visual` 
{: #section5}

_See github issue [#978](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/978)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/978 -->



**Avneesh Singh:** There was a suggestion over on github that when there is text in a book, this should satisfy `accessmodesufficient=visual`.  

> **Proposed resolution: We will not add `accessmodesufficient=visual` for text content, instead we will clarify why it should not be done.** *(Avneesh Singh)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

**Avneesh Singh:** but discussion revealed that text can be consumed via multiple modes.  
… so instead, Matt G proposed that there should be a note explaining this concept, and why accessmodesufficient=visual does not apply.  
… and why such cases should be covered by `accessmodesufficient=textual`.  

**Charles LaPierre:** if a book has both images and text and the images are described via alt-text, then `accessmodesufficient=textual` works, but also a`ccessmodesufficient=textual, visual`.  

**Avneesh Singh:** to clarify, `accessmodesufficient` means that the content of the book can be consumed via ALL the following modes.  
… so the comma in that attribute means logical AND.  

**Bill Kasdorf:** somewhere we need to be clear on: 1. that two values is AND (not OR), and 2. that `accessmodesufficient` property is repeatable.  

**Avneesh Singh:** a lot of this also depends on how you are presenting it.  
… e.g. if you are presenting this information in JSON vs XML.  
… in JSON this would all be in a list.  

> **Proposed resolution: We will not add `accessmodesufficient=visuala for text content, instead we will clarify why it should not be done.** *(Avneesh Singh)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Matthew Chan:* +1.

> *Charles LaPierre:* +1.

> *Laura Brady:* +1.

> *Bill Kasdorf:* +1.

> *Juliette McShane:* +1.

> *Ben Schroeter:* 0.

### 6. Reference to idpf accessibility forum 
{: #section6}

_See github issue [#1417.](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1417.)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1417. -->



**Avneesh Singh:** in the IDPF version of a11y technique, there is a reference to a forum that no longer exists.  
… for people who have to discuss techniques, where do they post?.  
… idea is for people to post directly to the issue tracker.  
… there are other options, but github is easy for anyone to find and post on.  

> **Proposed resolution: Refer to epub-specs GitHub issue tracker..** *(Avneesh Singh)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Charles LaPierre:* +1.

> *Matthew Chan:* +1.

> *Bill Kasdorf:* +1.

> *Ben Schroeter:* +1.

> *Jun’Ichi Yoshii:* / +1.

> *Laura Brady:* +1.

> *Juliette McShane:* +1.

### 7. Alignment of a11y spec with WCAG 2.1 and possibly to WCAG 2.2.
{: #section7}

**Avneesh Singh:** should a11y just point to whatever the latest version of WCAG is? And not discussion specific versioning of WCAG?.  
… alternatively, Matt G suggested that we could provide spec users with an option, e.g. a11y 1.1 + WCAG 2.1 or a11y 1.1 + WCAG 2.2.  

**Bill Kasdorf:** the first option (no specific versioning) is more consistent with other specs.  

**Charles LaPierre:** counter-point, on our technical bulletins, we're getting pushback from publishers.  
… people are worried that they won't be able to adapt their workflows in time.  
… this will be a problem if we try to keep our spec evergreen using non-specific WCAG versioning.  

**Avneesh Singh:** also, US publishers are ahead of the world in terms of WCAG uptake.  
… this is important, so we will return to this in January.  

**Ben Schroeter:** Agree that WCAG is a bit of a moving target.  
… giving the publishers the choice would probably be better from that perspective.  
… there's always a lag between when a new version of a standard comes out and when it is widely adopted.  

**Bill Kasdorf:** what about keeping our spec version agnostic, but having a requirement that authors report which version of WCAG they are applying.  

**Avneesh Singh:** there are multiple options, so maybe I will open an issue tracker where we can discuss this in more detail.  
… next call will be in January.  
… we will announce the precise date as we get closer.  

---
