---
layout: minutes
date: 2021-08-19
title: EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — 2021-08-19
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": [
            "https://schema.org",
            {
                "resolution": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/resolution",
                    "@context": {
                        "@vocab": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/"
                    }
                },
                "irc": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/irc"
                }
            }
        ],
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2021-08-19-epub",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2021-08-19",
        "irc": "epub",
        "datePublished": "2021-08-20",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
            "startDate": "2021-08-19",
            "endDate": "2021-08-19",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Dave Cramer"
                        },
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "We don't have anything to say about this"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Wendy Reid"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Masakazu Kitahara"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Shinya Takami (高見真也)"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Dan Lazin"
                }
            ]
        },
        "resolution": [
            {
                "@type": "Resolution",
                "resolution_number": 1,
                "resolution_text": "Do a research study into the usage of the vocabularies in EPUB authoring"
            }
        ]
    }

---

# EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc .draft_notice_needed}



**Date:** 2021-08-19

See also the [Agenda](ghttps://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-epub-wg/2021Aug/0021.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2021/08/19-epub-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Dave Cramer, Masakazu Kitahara, Wendy Reid, Shinya Takami (高見真也), Dan Lazin

**Regrets:** Brady Duga, Matthew Chan, John Foliot, Ben Schroeter, Toshiaki Koike

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Dave Cramer, We don't have anything to say about this

**Scribe(s):** Wendy Reid

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


> *Wendy Reid:* [https://www.w3.org/groups/wg/epub/calendar](https://www.w3.org/groups/wg/epub/calendar)

**Wendy Reid:** [general calendar things]  

### 1. Vocabularies
{: #section1}

> *Dave Cramer:* See [Appendix on vocabularies](https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/core/#app-vocabs)

_See github issue [#1763](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1763)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1763 -->



**Dave Cramer:** Main topic for today is the vocabularies  
… we had a substantial discussion in the last meeting about what to do with the structural semantics vocabulary (SSV)  
… there are some concerns about asserting some of the vocabularies as substantive  
… some of these values don't have behaviours attached, some do  
… given our overarching goal of reaching W3C recommendation status and interoperability  
… what we have to show here is that a particular vocabulary item is used by document authors, not necessarily used by reading systems  
… i.e., `epub:type="bodymatter"`  
… even though it doesn't impact the rendering of EPUBs  
… it seems to me that we need to collect some information about these values  
… especially from anyone creating EPUBs and using these terms  
… Ivan was also interested in moving the vocabularies into a separate note  
… I'm unsure  
… we just embarked on a long process of moving things here from their various homes  
… to codify it for anyone looking to learn about EPUB  
… or what properties to use with the item element  
… are the terms normative  
… is the appendix normative  
… in the last meeting we explored moving the SSV vocabulary to a non-normative note  
… that's what I'm doing here, exploring the other side  
… I think it would be good as a group to note what terms are used  
… and to get that information from other parts of the publishing world  
… we do want to demonstrate wide use of these terms to defend retaining them  
… any thoughts?  

**Murata Makoto:** I always try to avoid these things  

**Dave Cramer:** Same  
… do we think it's enough to gather information on them for now  

**Shinya Takami (高見真也):** I think some prefixes for fxl or `epub:type` are used in many cases  
… it's necessary to maintain some of these for interoperability  
… but may not be required to be normative  
… I'm in support of moving them out  

**Murata Makoto:** Even if we specify these values, do reading systems care?  

**Dave Cramer:** Some are important, like nav or cover-image  
… the FXL properties are important  
… and have an impact on rendering  
… one of my goals is to have this spec match reality  
… there's already deprecated values amongst these vocabs  
… if our research shows that more are aspirational than realistic  
… I do want to inform an author of that fact  
… Are we good to collect some information on these terms to help us make a decision on this?  

> *Wendy Reid:* +1

**Murata Makoto:** +1  

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* +1

> **Proposed resolution: Do a research study into the usage of the vocabularies in EPUB authoring** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Dave Cramer:* +1

> *Wendy Reid:* +1

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* +1

> *Masakazu Kitahara:* +1

> ***Resolution #1: Do a research study into the usage of the vocabularies in EPUB authoring***
{: #resolution1 .resolution}

**Dave Cramer:** I will figure out a methodology for this  

### 2. Explain the purpose of the landmarks nav (issue epub-specs#1761)
{: #section2}

_See github issue [#1761](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1761)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1761 -->


**Dave Cramer:** explain the purpose of the landmarks nav  
… I don't think I want to have this discussion without Matt and Brady  
… and with no representatives of the a11y activity  
… I would propose we postpone this discussion  
… We don't have the right people in the virtual room for this one  

**Shinya Takami (高見真也):** Kadokawa uses landmarks for our EPUB files  

**Dave Cramer:** We use it minimally  
… mainly to provide a link for the TOC  

**Dan Lazin:** A learning opportunity  
… why were landmarks added? What were they meant to do?  
… seems like they conflict  

**Dave Cramer:** My understanding is that they came from the OEB/EPUB2 feature called "guide"  
… there was an original element in the OPF called a guide where you could provide a tour of the highlights of the book  
… signposts  
… pointers into the content that was different from the TOC  
… providing quick references to glossaries or indexes, special features, etc  
… when UI conventions in EPUB hadn't been solidified  
… some RSs have exposed these before in their UI  
… but is happening less and less  
… as EPUB has stabilized and matured  

**Dan Lazin:** This sounds like a widget that has been deprecated  

**Dave Cramer:** I wouldn't argue with that  

**Shinya Takami (高見真也):** In the past, Kindle wasn't able to use the navigation element, so it used this  
… so we used landmarks in place of that  

**Dave Cramer:** We have some homework  
… thanks everyone!  

---


### 3. Resolutions
{: #res}

* [Resolution #1](#resolution1): Do a research study into the usage of the vocabularies in EPUB authoring
