---
layout: minutes
date: 2021-08-26
title: EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — 2021-08-26
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": [
            "https://schema.org",
            {
                "resolution": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/resolution",
                    "@context": {
                        "@vocab": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/"
                    }
                },
                "irc": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/irc"
                }
            }
        ],
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2021-08-26-epub-a11y",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2021-08-26",
        "irc": "epub-a11y",
        "datePublished": "2021-08-26",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco",
            "startDate": "2021-08-26",
            "endDate": "2021-08-26",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Avneesh Singh"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Gregorio Pellegrino"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Wendy Reid"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "John Foliot"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Matt Garrish"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Bill Kasdorf"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "George Kerscher"
                }
            ]
        }
    }

---

# EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}



**Date:** 2021-08-26

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-epub-wg/2021Aug/0028.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2021/08/26-epub-a11y-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Avneesh Singh, Wendy Reid, Gregorio Pellegrino, John Foliot, Matt Garrish, Bill Kasdorf, George Kerscher

**Regrets:** Ben Schroeter, Tzviya Siegman

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Avneesh Singh

**Scribe(s):** Gregorio Pellegrino

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


### 1. Continue discussion on is 0 tolerance for accessibility conformance practical? 
{: #section1}

_See github issue [#1767](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1767)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1767 -->



**Avneesh Singh:** we had a long discussion about this issue during last call  
… Charles suggested to use a string "significantly" conforms to  
… but then we had some comments on the issue  

**John Foliot:** I like the idea to use "significantly conforms to"  
… I the VPAT you can describe it, to tell that perfect is a goal  
… but achieve it is complicated  
… in the USA an accessibility problem can goes to a legal issue  

**Matt Garrish:** I think it's ok for a publisher to tell it in the accessibility summary  
… I have concerns about writing in specs what it means to be significantly accessible  

**Avneesh Singh:** do you mean that you can put whatever you want in the `conformsTo` field?  

**Matt Garrish:** yes  

**John Foliot:** I'm active in the Silver WG, we are working on the score system  
… in `conformsTo` may we link so a self-published accessibility statement (for publishers)?  

**Matt Garrish:** we have `certifierReport` metadata for doing this  
… it's optional  

**John Foliot:** the `conformsTo` metadata instead is not optional, it is mandatory  
… what about about making only one in `conformsTo` and `certifierReport` mandatory?  

**Matt Garrish:** actually `conformsTo` is not mandatory  

**Bill Kasdorf:** to end users what is most interesting is what it doesn't conform  
… it would be useful to express it  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** for local legislation the conformance is important  
… also in metadata we don't have ways for telling which accessibility issues are present in a document  

**George Kerscher:** I don't think we should get out from Silver  

> *John Foliot:* +1 to George

> *John Foliot:* WCAG 3 is "far off" IMHO

**Avneesh Singh:** is it a problem to have `conformsTo` linking to WCAG and then in the `accessibilitySummary` telling that there may be issues?  

**George Kerscher:** I think we should not worry about legal issues  

**John Foliot:** my background tells me that think about legal risks is important  
… I think that standards should not enable contractions  
… I think we should balance it  

**George Kerscher:** what does the the UX metadata guidelines tell to display when `conformsTo` is empty?  

**Avneesh Singh:** nothing or unknown?  

**George Kerscher:** so you can use `certifierReport` instead `conformsTo`  

**John Foliot:** some certifier require to have conformsTo metadata for their certification  
… so it is not "optional" for being certified  
… I think we need a formal reference to link to  

**Matt Garrish:** we can add in the specs that if partial conformance is present, then the `certifierReport` is mandatory  
… in the conformanceTo we may use EPUB11-WCAG21-A-PARTIAL  

> *John Foliot:* +1 Matt - that's what I personally would like to see: addressing a real-world issue with a "standardized" solution

> *Bill Kasdorf:* +1 to Matt

**John Foliot:** I would also suggest to define a "standard" way to make certifier reports  
… VPAT may be a solution  

**Matt Garrish:** sure, we can recommend it  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** for me the `certifierReport` should be per publication and not for all publications  

**Matt Garrish:** I don't know  

**Bill Kasdorf:** I'm favor for this approaches, but I see many VPATs that are false  
… a lot of publishers are not able to read VPATs  

> *John Foliot:* to be clear, I am not advocating using a VPAT per-se, but rather look at VPATs as a model for conformance reporting

**Bill Kasdorf:** I think that have a report per publication is useful plus a report from the publisher telling on what they're working  

**Wendy Reid:** I'm concerned about telling that you must have to create a report for titles  
… I think trade publishers would not use it, because it is not meaningful for retailers  

**Avneesh Singh:** why not relaxing the report, if we have `accessibilitySummary`  
… ?  

**Matt Garrish:** yes, I think there are different ways to achieve it  

**Avneesh Singh:** I think we had an excellent discussion, Matt can you now propose changes for the specs?  

**John Foliot:** I think there are differences between prose versus machine-readable metadata  
… so we should make the distinction clear in the specs  
… for example telling the conformsTo MUST be an URL  

**Matt Garrish:** we had this discussion for EPUB Accessibility 1.1  
… we had issues for complex URLs  
… I think that we can find a way using `conformsTo` plus `certifierReport`  

### 2. TPAC meetings to schedule with APA and other accessibility groups. Two meetings are scheduled for now.
{: #section2}

**Avneesh Singh:** we have only two meetings right now, one for public registry  
… it's not EPUB 3 specific, more on publishing community  
… the other meeting is about the sound hazard propriety  
… I wrote an email, they'll discuss it in the Silver meeting  
… we should be present  
… I think that defining an agenda is important  
… for sure we may discuss the horizontal review  
… Wendy do you think are we ready in September to trigger the review?  

**Wendy Reid:** I think so  
… this week we'll discuss accessibility issues  

**Avneesh Singh:** great, any other items for the agenda?  

**Wendy Reid:** I know APA wants to know more on accessibility in EPUB  

**Matt Garrish:** I think we should ask them what the "publication profile" they're working on means  
… I don't know the state-of-the-art, but I think it worth discussing it  

**John Foliot:** from my point of view: WCAG 3 is looping in defining the the scoring and conformance model  
… I proposed to define profiles  
… my proposal was to define profiles based on WCAG tests  
… as there is a subset of WCAG for PDFs  
… I also proposed to public declare protocols you are using in creating content  
… it's WCAG will used by different contents, I think that defining profiles is strategic  

**Matt Garrish:** yes, I think that something can be developed inside WCAG and something in profiles  

> *Bill Kasdorf:* Most people would consider Finnegans Wake not accessible.

**Avneesh Singh:** In conclusion I think we need a meeting with APA and WCAG 3.0  
… do we want it together or separate?  

**John Foliot:** I suggest separate  

### 3. Reminder to review of EPUB Accessibility specs and techniques.
{: #section3}

**Avneesh Singh:** Wendy, I can ask APA for reviewing EPUB 3.3  

**Wendy Reid:** fine  

**Avneesh Singh:** please file issues about EPUB Accessibility (if you have)  
… we are going to finalize the document  

---
