---
layout: minutes
date: 2021-08-12
title: EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — 2021-08-12
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": [
            "https://schema.org",
            {
                "resolution": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/resolution",
                    "@context": {
                        "@vocab": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/"
                    }
                },
                "irc": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/irc"
                }
            }
        ],
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2021-08-12-epub-a11y",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2021-08-12",
        "irc": "epub-a11y",
        "datePublished": "2021-08-12",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco",
            "startDate": "2021-08-12",
            "endDate": "2021-08-12",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Avneesh Singh"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Matthew Chan"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "George Kerscher"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ben Schroeter"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Vijaya Gwori Perumal"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Murata Makoto"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Will Awad"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Charles LaPierre"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Gregorio Pellegrino"
                }
            ]
        },
        "resolution": [
            {
                "@type": "Resolution",
                "resolution_number": 1,
                "resolution_text": "approve issue #1738"
            }
        ]
    }

---

# EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}



**Date:** 2021-08-12

See also the [Agenda]() and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2021/08/12-epub-a11y-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Avneesh Singh, George Kerscher, Matthew Chan, Ben Schroeter, Vijaya Gwori Perumal, Murata Makoto, Will Awad, Charles LaPierre, Gregorio Pellegrino

**Regrets:** 

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Avneesh Singh

**Scribe(s):** Matthew Chan

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


**Vijaya Gwori Perumal:** 16+ years in digital publishing. Hope to support this group with my technical expertise.  

### 1. Pull request for Media Overlays section: all meaningful text should also have audio.
{: #section1}

_See github pull request [#1759](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/pull/1759)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1759 -->



_See github issue [#1738](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1738)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1738 -->



**Avneesh Singh:** the background is that in MO there was no specific requirement that you should have audio for every meaningful text element  
… for a11y this is very important because MO provides experiences like screen reader  
… the PR above addresses this need  

**George Kerscher:** whenever I play MO I start it and let it go. I expect that everything that should be presented to me is presented. I'd never think to go back and look for content that is skipped. So this change seems perfect.  
… if there is a portion of a book that is presented as MO, then that portion should be self-contained  

**Avneesh Singh:** these requirements are informative so as not to break backwards compatibility  
… we are informing publishers that this is our expectation  
… in the future we may make this normative (i.e. future version of spec)  

> **Proposed resolution: approve issue #1738** *(Avneesh Singh)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *George Kerscher:* +1

> *Will Awad:* +1

> *Matthew Chan:* +1

> *Murata Makoto:* +1

> *Vijaya Gwori Perumal:* +1

> ***Resolution #1: approve issue #1738***
{: #resolution1 .resolution}

### 2. Start review of EPUB Accessibility specs and techniques.
{: #section2}

> *Avneesh Singh:* Specs: [https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/a11y/index.html](https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/a11y/index.html)

**Avneesh Singh:** in Nov we go to CR stage. The [EPUB a11y spec](https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/a11y/index.html) is complete. Now is time to do a thorough review.  

> *Avneesh Singh:* Techniques: [https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/a11y-tech/index.html](https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/a11y-tech/index.html)

> *Avneesh Singh:* Issue tracker: [https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/)

**Avneesh Singh:** please go through the spec and techniques documents. If you find anything, please file issues in tracker  
… proposed deadline for issues of 8th of September?  

**Murata Makoto:** you said that we are going to create CR, but is that for epub a11y 1.1, or for techniques as well?  

**Avneesh Singh:** CR is only for epub a11y 1.1  
… no objections to proposed deadline?  

> *Murata Makoto:* No objections from me.

**Avneesh Singh:** okay, so we'll set that deadline at Sep 8th  

### 3. long standing topic of 100% a11y requirements
{: #section3}

**Avneesh Singh:** Historically WCAG is pass/fail for A or AA level, etc.  
… this zero tolerance policy has been challenging  
… this will be addressed in WCAG 3.0, but that is far in the future  
… is there anything we can do to help this situation, or is it better to leave to WCAG?  

**George Kerscher:** I think its important for us to make it clear that when a publisher is claiming epub a11y to level A or AA, that if there are occasional errors that it does not violate the conformance claim  
… not sure where we should do this, but i think we should do it  
… worried that publishers could be sued for a single error in, for example, a 750 page textbook  

**Charles LaPierre:** i'm wondering about how we're doing the conformsTo examples. Could we do something there?  
… could we add "strives to " before the conformsTo text?  
… OR we could add something to the a11y metadata to the same effect  

**George Kerscher:** I've heard people start to say "largely conforms to..."  

**Ben Schroeter:** publishers should be given leeway as to what they are saying they conform to  
… we were thinking of "significantly conforming to..."  
… the "striving" language could be interpreted to mean that the publisher will conform in the future  

**Avneesh Singh:** so are we thinking of adding more combinations of possible text for conformsTo?  

**Ben Schroeter:** we need a way to describe how a publication relates to WCAG, because that's the information the schools want to know so that they don't get sued  
… the reference needs to be to WCAG rather than the epub a11y spec  

**Avneesh Singh:** where legislation requires WCAG AA, the spec would be helping, wouldn't it?  

**Ben Schroeter:** we want to be transparent and accurate in the conformsTo statement, but also to be responsive to market concerns  
… maybe by allowing conformance not in a binary way  

**George Kerscher:** in the real world there are many companies and certification programs where companies advertise their conformance to a standard (e.g. hotel cleanliness, etc.) but there's always little things that happen that cause imperfection  
… i have a hard time imagining someone could be sued if a book wasn't perfectly conforming to an advertised standard  
… we like to see companies have an a11y page on the website, and a way to contact the publisher if there are issues  
… if there were a significant violation found in a book, i would think the person would just inform the publisher using this method rather than go for a law suit  

**Avneesh Singh:** to summarize, we are mainly striving to provide publisher a way to make an accurate claim. Legal issues are not our arena.  
… I think we can ask mgarrish to create some strings to address this desire  

**George Kerscher:** is there a requirement to use these exact example strings?  

**Avneesh Singh:** no, but because the goal is to have these strings easily parsible, that is why we're giving examples  

**Charles LaPierre:** actually, spec says the value for conformsTo "MUST exactly match" the example strings  

**Avneesh Singh:** we should review whether it makes sense to have a MUST here  

**George Kerscher:** I like the exact text strings, but I think we should clarify that we mean significant conformance to whatever level is being referred to  

**Charles LaPierre:** I also support keeping the MUST. Don't want this field to be the wild west.  
… but we could have qualifications to what these statements mean  

**Avneesh Singh:** but would allowing additional qualifiers make it difficult for anyone trying to parse the field?  

**Charles LaPierre:** not sure that it would. There could be multiple strings in the conformsTo statement. One will be the one that matches exactly. And there could be additional qualifying statements.  
… as long as one of the required strings is present, it should be fine  
… so the qualifying thing could either be a refines element, or just separate from the MUST statement with a space  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** what do we mean by "significantly"?  

**Avneesh Singh:** so do we mean that we will also provide text strings for the qualifying statements?  

**Charles LaPierre:** we could provide those after discussion  

**George Kerscher:** is there an opportunity in the accessibility summary to resolve this issue?  
… i believe that in the spec itself we should be making it clear that inadvertent errors do not invalidate claims  
… to gpellegrino's point, if the publisher leaves out MathML etc. this would be a clear violation. Spelling errors, etc. would fall into the category of inadvertent error  
… we're trying to make it so that little tiny mistakes don't fall afoul of claims  

**Avneesh Singh:** we should try to define "significant" somewhere  
… but this is good enough for mgarrish to start drafting  
… but there is lots for us to discuss in the issue tracker  
… okay, the next call will be 2 weeks from now. We will now continue our bi-weekly calls.  

**George Kerscher:** to meet our september deadline, I think we should continue regular meeting schedule  

**Avneesh Singh:** thank you everyone for being here! See you all on the issue tracker.  

---


### 4. Resolutions
{: #res}

* [Resolution #1](#resolution1): approve issue #1738
