---
layout: minutes
date: 2021-09-23
title: EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — 2021-09-23
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": [
            "https://schema.org",
            {
                "resolution": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/resolution",
                    "@context": {
                        "@vocab": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/"
                    }
                },
                "irc": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/irc"
                }
            }
        ],
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2021-09-23-epub-a11y",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2021-09-23",
        "irc": "epub-a11y",
        "datePublished": "2021-09-23",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco",
            "startDate": "2021-09-23",
            "endDate": "2021-09-23",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Avneesh Singh"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Wendy Reid"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ben Schroeter"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "George Kerscher"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "John Foliot"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Gregorio Pellegrino"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Matt Garrish"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Bill Kasdorf"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Charles LaPierre"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Murata Makoto"
                }
            ]
        },
        "resolution": [
            {
                "@type": "Resolution",
                "resolution_number": 1,
                "resolution_text": "Move EPUB Accessibility FAQ to wiki on epub specs repo"
            },
            {
                "@type": "Resolution",
                "resolution_number": 2,
                "resolution_text": "Add explainer for WCAG 2.1 SC 2.4.6 in EPUB a11y techniques"
            }
        ]
    }

---

# EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}



**Date:** 2021-09-23

See also the [Agenda](https://www.w3.org/mid/74E483A09FF74B39B318D1743A8B2CC7@DESKTOPG923ARA) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2021/09/23-epub-a11y-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Avneesh Singh, Wendy Reid, Ben Schroeter, George Kerscher, John Foliot, Gregorio Pellegrino, Matt Garrish, Bill Kasdorf, Charles LaPierre, Murata Makoto

**Regrets:** Tzviya Siegman, Matthew Chan

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Avneesh Singh

**Scribe(s):** Wendy Reid

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


**Avneesh Singh:** Before we begin, we have some important meetings coming up  
… we have TPAC and DAISY meetings  
… we'll likely not have any regular meetings in October, next meeting in November  

### 1. EPUB Accessibility FAQ 
{: #section1}

_See github issue [#1817](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1817)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1817 -->



**Avneesh Singh:** let's talk about the first agenda item  
… Matt raised this issue yesterday  

_See github issue [#1819](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1819)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1819 -->



**Matt Garrish:** Something I bumped into while reviewing the document  
… we still have a reference to the old IDPF github repo  
… it's basically that we need to move this document if we want to still reference  
… I think it's ok, I've discussed this with Ivan  
… there's a way to keep this in Respec without formally publishing  
… bigger problem is #1819, what do we do about the optimization registry  
… the first one is easier, we publish it and update the reference  
… the registry issue is more complicated  
… it's basically a list of optimization standards  
… what do we do with it?  
… it's kind of process heavy, if there's a way to add a registry as a W3C registry  
… do we move it  
… I don't know what is the best approach  

**Avneesh Singh:** My understanding is that we don't want to give W3C status to any of these  
… I would say an HTML page sitting in the repo would be find for now  

**Matt Garrish:** Should we still call it a registry?  

**Avneesh Singh:** Yes the name can cause confusion  
… we shouldn't call it a registry  

**Matt Garrish:** Ok we'll move them away, and change the name  

**John Foliot:** I just wanted to point out, there is a way to host notes  
… the WAI domain has many  
… they're hosted in the TR space, but as non-normative notes  
… We have many for user requirements and things like that  
… making content accessible is one of them  
… tagged as working group notes  

> *John Foliot:* [https://www.w3.org/TR/coga-usable/](https://www.w3.org/TR/coga-usable/)

**Matt Garrish:** That was my original proposal  
… Ivan had suggested that we might not need a full note  
… I don't have a strong opinion  
… we can do them as notes  
… do they need formal standing  

> *Bill Kasdorf:* how useful is the information in them?

**Matt Garrish:** it's a general FAQ and some documents  
… once we get into note territory our hands are a little more bound  
… we'd need a WG  
… to vote and approve  

**John Foliot:** Would it not be under the EPUB WG  

**Matt Garrish:** If it's still running  

**Avneesh Singh:** WG Notes have process  

**John Foliot:** That seems like a positive  

**Avneesh Singh:** These particular notes are more challenging ownership wise  

**George Kerscher:** We did these when we were establishing the baseline of EPUB accessibility  
… we didn't have KB back them  
… could we add them into the KB  
… the registry is just a list of optimized standards for various things.  
… It's just informative  
… I don't know if that could also be an item in the KB  

**Avneesh Singh:** I would say for the list of optimized specifications if it's in the KB it's ok  
… the FAQs for the a11y spec is more tied up with EPUB Accessibility  

**Matt Garrish:** Agreed  
… we have documents like this in the repo right now  
… it's more lightweight, but we've published notes for other things  
… it's not quite a specification, it's not quite guidance, it's more background information  

**Avneesh Singh:** If we want to keep it in the epub-specs repo, a wiki might work  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** We have the KB, is it worth it to do all of this work?  

**Matt Garrish:** This is going back to design decisions  
… why we use schema  
… why things don't overlap with WCAG, it's not something we can farm out, it's very specific to the EPUB accessibility doc  
… it's not obsolete, but it's getting there  
… the spec has been out long enough now  

**Avneesh Singh:** Let's propose to put it on a wiki in the epub-specs space  
… it will not conflict with official notes  

> **Proposed resolution: Move EPUB Accessibility FAQ to wiki on epub specs repo** *(Avneesh Singh)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Wendy Reid:* +1

> *Matt Garrish:* +1

> *Bill Kasdorf:* +1

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* +1

> *Charles LaPierre:* +1

> *George Kerscher:* +1  

> *Ben Schroeter:* +1

> *John Foliot:* +1

> ***Resolution #1: Move EPUB Accessibility FAQ to wiki on epub specs repo***
{: #resolution1 .resolution}

### 2. Add technique explaining WCAG 2.4.6 passes for all publication headings 
{: #section2}

_See github issue [#1810](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1810)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1810 -->



**Avneesh Singh:** Next one is also from mgarrish  

**Matt Garrish:** A question that's sat in the back of my head  
… all headings must describe the topic of their section  
… which doesn't quite make sense for things like novels  
… what's their purpose and role  
… I opened the issue and was confirmed that they SCs don't quite cover all cases, it just needs to be a descriptive identifier for the content that follows  
… it's kind of problematic, also lumped with labels  
… it's too big a change for WCAG 2  
… good for WCAG 3 where we can discuss further  
… should we document this  
… how does WCAG apply to EPUB  
… it's a known issue with the wording  
… not to be concerned with the heading missing a topic  
… fits in with our techniques MO  

**George Kerscher:** Even numbers are fine  

**Matt Garrish:** That's what threw me off, there's context in numbers, but it's not descriptive of the content  
… it's going after a different problem, headings that don't match the content  
… do we want to document it  

**Avneesh Singh:** I think documenting it is good  
… one of the purposes of techniques is to explain how WCAG applies  

> **Proposed resolution: Add explainer for WCAG 2.1 SC 2.4.6 in EPUB a11y techniques** *(Avneesh Singh)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Matt Garrish:* +1

> *Wendy Reid:* +1

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* +1

> *Bill Kasdorf:* +1

> *Murata Makoto:* +1

**George Kerscher:** +1  

> ***Resolution #2: Add explainer for WCAG 2.1 SC 2.4.6 in EPUB a11y techniques***
{: #resolution2 .resolution}

### 3. Informative note for Unicode in EPUB accessibility 
{: #section3}

_See github issue [#1790](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1790)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1790 -->



**Avneesh Singh:** Next topic, unicode  
… I was thinking we should have an informative note in the spec that people should be using UTF-8 because it's required in EPUB and good for accessibility  
… when I speak to people about this, EPUB a11y is the first thing people see  
… come to EPUB core later  
… unicode is important for several languages  
… to solve that query, put in a note  
… Matt has mentioned not knowing where to put it  
… I'm not strong on this idea, but if we can find a spot, it would be nice  

**George Kerscher:** Does EPUBCheck check for UTF-8?  

**Matt Garrish:** Yes  

**George Kerscher:** Isn't this an internationalization issue?  

**Avneesh Singh:** Yes  

> *Bill Kasdorf:* and it's fundamental to XML

**George Kerscher:** I think it would be good to have it mentioned somewhere  

**Avneesh Singh:** Somewhere is the question  

**Matt Garrish:** That's actually what I was going to ask about  
… Makoto has asked for this as well, there's regional specific requirements  
… maybe add a section on internationalization  
… there's some sections on WCAG and EPUB, and there's the techniques  
… we don't clearly say use unicode anywhere  
… it would be an outlier  
… if we want to add a section on i18n, and various standards relating to that, that's one approach  

**John Foliot:** As far as W3C process, horizontal reviews need to be done  
… UTF-8 is a requirement in EPUB?  
… it needs to be captured somewhere  
… if this is something we can discuss in our meeting with Janina  

**Murata Makoto:** I like Matt's idea about introducing a section on i18n  
… if that section is introduced, I will have some things to include  
… TTS of Japanese documents containing ruby  
… DAISY has created a wiki, and Richard Ishida is working on a note  
… i18n WG knows ruby well  
… I pinged him again yesterday about this  
… it's not specific to EPUB, but to HTML  

**Avneesh Singh:** So Matt, if you want a section on i18n, techniques is probably a better place?  

**Matt Garrish:** I don't know if it's a technique  
… it might need to be in the spec  
… specific problems and how to solve them would go in the techniques  
… the core a11y spec has the links to WCAG  
… a brief explainer  

**Avneesh Singh:** That sounds like the way forward  
… a paragraph in the core document  
… and techniques  

**Matt Garrish:** It could even go into the overview  
… I don't think it needs to be elaborate  

**Avneesh Singh:** Action item to draft something and then we can review  

### 4. Normative references to a specification of metadata properties are needed. 
{: #section4}

_See github issue [#1799](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1799), [#1767](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1767)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1799 w3c/epub-specs/1767 -->



_See github pull request [#1818](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/pull/1818), [#1815](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/pull/1815)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1818 w3c/epub-specs/1815 -->



**Avneesh Singh:** These are the reminders, there are some PRs with requests to review  

**Avneesh Singh:** there's some further discussion on zero-tolerance for a11y review, please provide comments  
… AOB?  

**George Kerscher:** Asking for comments for these on GH?  

**Avneesh Singh:** The PRs need review, and the last one is an issue, please provide comments on that  

**George Kerscher:** Personally, the approach being taken for discovery seems ok  

**Avneesh Singh:** There's more emails  

**Charles LaPierre:** I was just looking at the editor's note FXL techniques  
… diff and preview have errors  

> *Charles LaPierre:* Add editor's note mentioning the fxl techniques #1818

> *Charles LaPierre:* [https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/pull/1818](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/pull/1818)

**Wendy Reid:** It's already merged, so there's no "diff"  

> *John Foliot:* matt, FWIW, another emergent spec with a section related to security and privacy. Note that this WG are in ongoing discussions with i18n folks at W3C. See: [https://w3c.github.io/personalization-semantics/content/index.html#privacy-and-security-considerations](https://w3c.github.io/personalization-semantics/content/index.html#privacy-and-security-considerations)

**Matt Garrish:** Just look at the file changes  

**Avneesh Singh:** Let's continue discussion on GH  
… APA call times will be finalized, and I will send them to the mailing list  
… see you all in the 3.3 call tomorrow  
… have a nice day!  

---


### 5. Resolutions
{: #res}

* [Resolution #1](#resolution1): Move EPUB Accessibility FAQ to wiki on epub specs repo
* [Resolution #2](#resolution2): Add explainer for WCAG 2.1 SC 2.4.6 in EPUB a11y techniques
