---
layout: minutes
date: 2021-05-13
title: EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — 2021-05-13
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": [
            "https://schema.org",
            {
                "resolution": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/resolution",
                    "@context": {
                        "@vocab": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/"
                    }
                },
                "irc": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/irc"
                }
            }
        ],
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2021-05-13-epub",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2021-05-13",
        "irc": "epub",
        "datePublished": "2021-05-14",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
            "startDate": "2021-05-13",
            "endDate": "2021-05-13",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Dave Cramer"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Matthew Chan"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Masakazu Kitahara"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Wendy Reid"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Shinya Takami (高見真也)"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Matt Garrish"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Toshiaki Koike"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ben Schroeter"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Brady Duga"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Marisa DeMeglio"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Fred Chasen"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Dan Lazin"
                }
            ]
        },
        "resolution": [
            {
                "@type": "Resolution",
                "resolution_number": 1,
                "resolution_text": "Close issue 1298"
            },
            {
                "@type": "Resolution",
                "resolution_number": 2,
                "resolution_text": "Merge PR 1670, close issue 1303, forbidding fragment identifiers in hrefs for items"
            },
            {
                "@type": "Resolution",
                "resolution_number": 3,
                "resolution_text": "If a property is invalid, ignore it, close issue 1673"
            }
        ]
    }

---

# EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc .draft_notice_needed}



**Date:** 2021-05-13

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-epub-wg/2021May/0029.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2021/05/13-epub-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Masakazu Kitahara, Matthew Chan, Dave Cramer, Wendy Reid, Shinya Takami (高見真也), Matt Garrish, Toshiaki Koike, Ben Schroeter, Brady Duga, Marisa DeMeglio, Fred Chasen, Dan Lazin

**Regrets:** 

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Dave Cramer

**Scribe(s):** Matthew Chan

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


**Dave Cramer:** welcome Fred!  

**Fred Chasen:** i'm AC rep for Scribd (online subscription service for epubs, PDFs)  
… good to be back  

### 1. Update on TFs
{: #section1}

**Wendy Reid:** this week both TFs met  
… FXL TF solved issue with markdown not working in respec doc  
… FXL TF will also start meeting biweekly instead of weekly  
… Locators TF continue to go through use-cases  
… considering potentially coming back around to page numbers  

**Dave Cramer:** any questions above TFs?  

### 2. Remove CSS Speech Support 
{: #section2}

_See github issue [#1298](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1298)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1298 -->



**Dave Cramer:** a while ago the CSS Speech module was unimplemented, but apparently it has come back, and is in CR now  
… though still not aware of too many implementations, at least in epub world  
… given CR status, not comfortable taking it out at this point  

**Brady Duga:** there hasn't been much harm to it being there yet, so it seems fine to leave it  

**Matt Garrish:** as its unimplemented, nobody has done anything with it  
… but if we're not touching PLS or SSML then we can probably leave it too  

**Wendy Reid:** do we know why CSS put this back on rec track?  
… wonder if it is reviving due to resurgence of voice tech  

**Dave Cramer:** did some quick searching this AM, and there seem to be a few voice over things that will read a few of these properties  

**Matt Garrish:** it's also been stripped down a little  

**Dave Cramer:** okay, so we close the issue  

> **Proposed resolution: Close issue 1298** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Ben Schroeter:* +1

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* +1

> *Matthew Chan:* +1

> *Toshiaki Koike:* +1

> *Wendy Reid:* +1

> *Dave Cramer:* +1

> *Matt Garrish:* +1

> *Masakazu Kitahara:* +1

> *Brady Duga:* +1

> *Fred Chasen:* +1

> ***Resolution #1: Close issue 1298***
{: #resolution1 .resolution}

### 3. Alt-text for cover images 
{: #section3}

_See github issue [#1300](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1300)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1300 -->



**Dave Cramer:** this was discussed in a11y call this morning  

**Matt Garrish:** we didn't end with a proposal  
… we're looking for feedback from RS people about which of the possible solutions could realistically be implemented  

**Brady Duga:** not sure how we get covers  

**Wendy Reid:** probably sent separately  

### 4. Are fragment identifiers allowed in manifest? 
{: #section4}

_See github issue [#1303](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1303)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1303 -->



**Dave Cramer:** i made an epub that had fragment identifier in href  
… epubcheck threw an error  
… but not sure which section of the spec this requirement came from  
… so something to think about, especially as we're rewriting the spec to refer to WHATWG URL spec  

**Ben Schroeter:** would we need to do some epubcheck work if we were to decide to allow these fragment identifiers?  

**Dave Cramer:** yes, but that shouldn't be an obstacle, not big code change  

**Ben Schroeter:** any downside? could it be abused?  

**Matt Garrish:** just curious what the expectation is for RS if it is a fragment? What is RS supposed to do?  
… load then scroll to fragment?  
… and what about only having each resource listed once?  

**Dave Cramer:** i think this is the same as activating a link in toc, i.e., yes to scroll  
… but not suppress any of the document before the fragment  

**Brady Duga:** how would that work in the spine? So chapter 1 is beginning of chapter, but chapter 2 is link to middle of the book?  

**Dave Cramer:** yes, but we could have a note to say not to do that  

**Ben Schroeter:** is there a legitimate reason to do this?  
… or is this just to fix the epubcheck thing?  

**Matt Garrish:** suspect this has something to do with the requirement to point to a resource, not a fragment of that resource  

**Brady Duga:** maybe if you want to skip some kind of chapter heading for each chapter, so that you start with the first paragraph of the chapter?  

**Wendy Reid:** we've had some cases where the entire book is in a single HTML file  
… so this would allow you to actually navigate to the inside chapters?  

**Ben Schroeter:** what about the fact that fragments need to be allowed for refines and stuff like that?  

**Matt Garrish:** that's not in the manifest  

**Dave Cramer:** a valid reason for changing the spec is to make it match reality, and given that we already enforce this, allowing a fragment here would vastly complicate the responsibilities of an RS  
… i think we just say hrefs in items shouldn't have fragments  

**Matt Garrish:** and the URL spec has a type that specifically can't have fragments  
… so easy to do in spec  

**Wendy Reid:** is that the current test in the PR that you have out?  

**Matt Garrish:** yeah (I didn't know we had an issue out for this at the time)  

> **Proposed resolution: Merge PR 1670, close issue 1303** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* +1

> *Toshiaki Koike:* +1

> *Masakazu Kitahara:* +1

> **Proposed resolution: Merge PR 1670, close issue 1303, forbidding fragment identifiers in hrefs for items** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Dave Cramer:* +1

> *Matt Garrish:* +1

> *Ben Schroeter:* +1

> *Brady Duga:* +1

> *Matthew Chan:* +1

> *Wendy Reid:* +1

> *Fred Chasen:* +1

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* +1

> ***Resolution #2: Merge PR 1670, close issue 1303, forbidding fragment identifiers in hrefs for items***
{: #resolution2 .resolution}

### 5. Detailed definition of Content Display Area 
{: #section5}

_See github issue [#1306](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1306)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1306 -->



**Dave Cramer:** supposed to be the area in the display for epub content documents, excluding borders, margins, etc. injected by RS  
… touches upon what part of screen real-estate should be controlled by author vs RS  
… is just purely a FXL issue?  

**Fred Chasen:** one place where this comes up is the little page dog-ear icon that clashes with book  

**Matt Garrish:** we haven't spec'ed what a viewport is, then we tried to describe a part within the viewport where content is displayed  
… hard for us to be very specific about this  

**Dave Cramer:** then is it possible to be more specific? Esp. given that RS might mess with putting more margin on body so that content doesn't clash with bevel  
… is there anything to be gained by being more precise?  

> *Brady Duga:* +1

**Wendy Reid:** are we talking about reflow, or FXL? Because the problems around headers, footers, etc. are mainly a problem for reflow where authors might have their own ideas about these regions  
… for FXL the only question is whether it fits within the screen  

**Brady Duga:** Content Display Area is only used within FXL (except for definitions)  
… the idea was that RS should not mess with visuals in cases of FXL  
… but Content Display Area technically applies to everything, because its just in the definitions  

**Dave Cramer:** so is restricting the definition a solution?  

**Brady Duga:** we could  
… also, looking at the definitions, its not clear what the difference between viewport and Content Display Area is supposed to be  

**Ben Schroeter:** I think there should be general guidance that RS should not obscure publisher content  
… for the question at hand, I think the definition we have is suitable  
… not sure how much more precise we can be  

**Dave Cramer:** one more factor is that we've quite often had request for "full bleed" even in reflow  
… e.g. where authors want something like an image to take up the entire screen  
… e.g. in chapter opening photos in recipe books  

**Matt Garrish:** should we try to move it over to RS spec, and try to explain the concept of Content Display Area?  
… seems to apply only to RS rendering of FXL content  

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* +1 to mgarrish

**Dave Cramer:** this could really use a diagram to help explain  
… i'll look into that  

**Ben Schroeter:** maybe we just need to reframe the question to how should RS accommodate the desire for full bleed content?  

**Brady Duga:** there are plenty of FXL implementations that enable full bleed  

**Dave Cramer:** and some user gestures make an overlay appear over the content  

### 6. SVG Validation 
{: #section6}

_See github issue [#1323](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1323)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1323 -->



**Dave Cramer:** one of the complicating factors is undated references to specs, and now we have SVG1 and SVG2  

**Brady Duga:** would prefer if we didn't validate SVG  
… this came up because there was an SVG 1.1 with a `rel=no refer`, and this failed epubcheck  
… i've found a couple other SVG validation errors that came up because of things that weren't valid in 1.1  
… and even if we do validate, we can only say that it was valid to an SVG Schema at the time of validation  

**Matt Garrish:** compounding the problem is that `validator.nu` has partially gone with SVG2, with no plans to fully move to SVG2  

**Brady Duga:** i understand need for validity of XHTML, as XHTML is often edited by hand  
… not true for SVG, which are often made by tools  
… so you're putting authors at the mercy of their tools, if those tools are generating invalid SVG  
… and note that at this point spec doesn't require validation  

**Dave Cramer:** is there a requirement for well-formedness of XML?  

**Ben Schroeter:** what about the XML entities in the DTDs of the SVG?  

**Dave Cramer:** we're not touching anything about rendering or processing, just saying that spec does not require validity, therefore epubcheck does not need to check validity  

**Brady Duga:** if we don't have requirement for validity, then Ivan's issue goes away  

**Matt Garrish:** i we've always had requirement that things conform to XHTML syntax  
… but what about when SVGs are embedded in the content?  

**Dave Cramer:** maybe our current action item is to talk to Romain about how this would affect epubcheck  
… would also like to hear what Ivan says about this  

### 7. Handling of invalid properties 
{: #section7}

_See github issue [#1673](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1673)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1673 -->



**Matt Garrish:** when I was making the URL spec change this came up  
… when property values expand, they are supposed to expand into valid URL string  
… assuming that if it is invalid, then RS should ignore property  

**Brady Duga:** there are also situations where RS is suppose to ignore in failure case  

**Dave Cramer:** right, this causes as little disruption to reading experience as possible  
… e.g. not doing something to alert the reader  

> **Proposed resolution: If a property is invalid, ignore it, close issue 1673** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Ben Schroeter:* +1

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* +1

> *Brady Duga:* +1

> *Matt Garrish:* +1

> *Dave Cramer:* +1

> *Matthew Chan:* +1

> *Fred Chasen:* +1

> *Toshiaki Koike:* +1

> *Wendy Reid:* +1

> ***Resolution #3: If a property is invalid, ignore it, close issue 1673***
{: #resolution3 .resolution}

### 8. AOB?
{: #section8}

**Wendy Reid:** I sent invites for F2F earlier today  
… will circulate agenda when we have one drafted  
… let us know if you want to add anything specific to agenda  

**Dave Cramer:** will try to tackle some of the bigger issues, e.g. HTML serialization  
… okay, thanks everyone! Talk to you soon!  

> *Dave Cramer:* RRSAgent: bye

---


### 9. Resolutions
{: #res}

* [Resolution #1](#resolution1): Close issue 1298
* [Resolution #2](#resolution2): Merge PR 1670, close issue 1303, forbidding fragment identifiers in hrefs for items
* [Resolution #3](#resolution3): If a property is invalid, ignore it, close issue 1673