---
layout: minutes
date: 2021-04-20
title: EPUB 3 Working Group FXL A11y Task Force Telco — 2021-04-20
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": [
            "https://schema.org",
            {
                "resolution": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/resolution",
                    "@context": {
                        "@vocab": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/"
                    }
                },
                "irc": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/irc"
                }
            }
        ],
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2021-04-20-epub-a11y",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group FXL A11y Task Force Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group FXL A11y Task Force Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2021-04-20",
        "irc": "epub-fxl",
        "datePublished": "2021-04-20",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group FXL A11y Task Force Telco",
            "startDate": "2021-04-20",
            "endDate": "2021-04-20",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Wendy Reid"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Matthew Chan"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Laura Brady"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Deborah Kaplan"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Rachel Osolen"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Brady Duga"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Charles LaPierre"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Gregorio Pellegrino"
                }
            ]
        }
    }

---

# EPUB 3 Working Group FXL A11y Task Force Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}



**Date:** 2021-04-20

See also the [Agenda]() and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2021/04/20-epub-fxl-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Wendy Reid, Matthew Chan, Laura Brady, Deborah Kaplan, Rachel Osolen, Brady Duga, Charles LaPierre, Gregorio Pellegrino

**Regrets:** 

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Wendy Reid

**Scribe(s):** Matthew Chan

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


**Wendy Reid:** we had homework from last week, just going through the list  
… review of Daisy KB  

**Ken Jones:** I spent a few hours looking through Daisy KB FXL documentation  
… spotted a few things that I thought were out of date/that I thought were wrong  
… I've done a write up on [DropBox paper](https://paper.dropbox.com/doc/Links-to-DAISY-KB-commented-docs--BJOThpgrG5rvKrRjYQhjwFVOAg-b1DlgnppIzzBlph0z2b21)  
… this is like an index page, with comments  
… I'll just go through them now  
… each entry is a link to the KB itself  
… (feel free to add to my comments)  
… KB0 is a naming consistency issue  
… KB1 seems to be written from particular point of view ("are commonly" vs "may be")  
… I would add paragraph about benefits of fxl format  
… reference to "where epub consists of primarily FXL..." is that referring to something deprecated?  

**Brady Duga:** even without multiple renditions you can put pre-paginated/fixed layout pages in a reflow epub  
… no real support for this in the wild  
… by the way, are we taking over the Daisy KB? Or is this just recommendations?  

**Wendy Reid:** we're making recommendations, and mgarrish was here last week and in agreement  

**Ken Jones:** feel free to add to my comments clarifying these sorts of points  
… re. WCAG AA conformance, add resize text  
… KB2 more references to fxl within reflow epub  
… and found a broken link in the KB2 document  
… recommend moving a summary paragraph up to the top of the document  
… KB3 re. images in spine, this is not really something i've seen  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** i've seen it in manga created from PDFs  
… this was in early days of FXL  

**Ken Jones:** so we might talk about this in best practices  
… it seems that whoever wrote this thought of manga as the main use of FXL  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** You can do it, but you have to have a fallback (an XHTML)  

**Wendy Reid:** I feel like we should just steer people away from this  

**Ken Jones:** maybe make it more clear at top of document that it is not a good way to do it, and is largely unsupported  
… KB4 found a typo  
… clarification that since you can embed raster img in SVG, there are some limits to scalability  
… KB5 is WCAG conformance table  
… I would add note that nature of FXL makes it impossible to achieve WCAG AA or higher  
… and recommend, again, loosening language re. image-based FXL to cover uses other than manga-type publications  
… clarifications re. the fact that in FXLs contrast and font choice can be issues  
… document suggests that in some FXLs allow users to change appearance of text. This seems uncommon.  

**Brady Duga:** Some RS may allow users to customize line spacing  
… there's no rule against it, but nobody does it  

**Ken Jones:** that might surprise some authors of FXL, who might not expect that in their publications  
… KB6 seems to suggest that the problem is finding a place to put the image descriptions, but often image descriptions are not visual?  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** I think that is in reference to long descriptions, not specifically alt-text  

**Ken Jones:** well then it could simply be a link out to a different page? I still think the language in the KB could be updated  
… continuing, animations have long been supported in FXL  
… has anyone seen FXLs with extended image descriptions? How was it done?  

**Wendy Reid:** i've seen it as an interactive element  
… tapping an arrow under the image would open an overlay  
… but only in highly interactive content  
… same way definitions and videos were implemented (tap to reveal pop-up)  

**Ken Jones:** Q re. Daisy KB generally. How to describe images that are spreads, or montages (i.e. combinations of smaller images)  
… i've opened a github issue about this  

> *Ken Jones:* [https://github.com/daisy/kb/issues/35](https://github.com/daisy/kb/issues/35)

**Ken Jones:** i think summarizing that issue in the KB would be useful  
… KB7, no suggested changes  

> *Ken Jones:* [https://paper.dropbox.com/doc/Suggestions-for-additional-DAISY-KB-articles--BJOEvLh5aCOg9bXd3Rhz3YGzAg-MhUnnl1PcYVEMBVmeaC6A](https://paper.dropbox.com/doc/Suggestions-for-additional-DAISY-KB-articles--BJOEvLh5aCOg9bXd3Rhz3YGzAg-MhUnnl1PcYVEMBVmeaC6A)

**Ken Jones:** i've got suggestions for where there are currently gaps  
… for additional articles  
… one for structure (e.g. TOC)  
… one for Tables  
… one for interaction  
… maybe one for comparison between FXL and PDFs?  

**Rachel Osolen:** re. descriptions for spreads  
… some resources recommend that the entire image description appear all on the first half, with the second half simply containing text referring back to the first half  
… a different way is to split the description over the composite parts of the spread (works well for children's books)  
… for montages and complex images, recommendation is to provide a general layout of the image, and then drill down and describe each part  
… and keep in mind that not all parts of such an image need to be describe in the same level of detail  

**Charles LaPierre:** alt-text is great, but that is only available via AT  
… how do we describe these images to people with, for example, cognitive disabilities?  
… we have to think about not just screen-readers  
… also, when alt-text gets very long, that's a problem for editing  
… no support for semantic markup within alt-text  
… that's why extended desc are good  
… the other best practice should probably be to make the image itself clickable (e.g. if you have no space to add a click here link)  
… that would then bring up HTML rendered text equivalent of the image  

**Brady Duga:** re. splitting images into pieces for describing complex images  
… is this discussed in the KB?  

**Ken Jones:** its not in the KB, but its in the daisy github issue (above)  

**Brady Duga:** about alt-text, its not necessarily true that only screen readers access info n alt-text or ARIA label  
… we've extracted ARIA labels to do other things, e.g. getting definitions, highlighting words  
… we could recommend that RS do other things with this sort of data that is already available  

**Wendy Reid:** we don't need to get too deep into alt-text, this is fairly well understood already  
… but extended desc has an UI component which may be more of an issue for FXL  

**Ken Jones:** so, would that sort of desc be something authored?  

**Charles LaPierre:** i thought so, yes. And then it would be up to the RS how to access that information  
… but the idea of the RS adding something on top of the book is like what we are doing with Image Share  
… but that requires plug-ins  

**Wendy Reid:** this is great  
… and because this is hosted in github we can probably directly help with the edits as well  

> *Charles LaPierre:* +1 great job Ken!

**Wendy Reid:** what kind of content uses FXL? Common use-cases for FXL.  
… talked to Rachel_O about this  

**Rachel Osolen:** started working on this. I'm waiting on BNC. Wanted to reach out to eBOUND.  
… I have a list of types of books which commonly use FXL  
… hoping to get actual numbers  

**Brady Duga:** its a hard question. Are we asking who sorts of books are MADE using FXL? Or what FXL books are actually read?  
… if read, then its going to be mostly manga  
… might not be worth asking 2nd question  

**Rachel Osolen:** in terms of what is being made, then in Canada its probably going to be comics, children's books, maybe textbooks, and anything else image heavy  
… would be nice to get data from distributors  

**Brady Duga:** yes, sales would be very useful  

**Charles LaPierre:** we're working on a set of guidelines for libraries and bookstores to show the a11y metadata in books  
… i'm wondering if we should also recommend that they give an additional warning where the book is FXL  

**Ken Jones:** i wonder whether its worth mentioning the interactive aspect of FXL?  
… its under used, not many publishers use it  
… some educational publishers want this sort of interactivity  

**Deborah Kaplan:** i don't see anything in Schema metadata specifically about FXL  
… should we recommend putting something about FXL in a free-text section of the Schema?  
… if the Schema vocabs are not set in stone, maybe recommend that something be added to identify FXL?  

**Charles LaPierre:** yes, we can add values to vocab  
… but what I was referring to was using what is already in the metadata to identify FXL  
… re. interactive. Has anyone seen comics where the reader zooms into the publication, and allows you to browse panel by panel?  

**Wendy Reid:** yes, comixology (Amazon), kobo allows you to zoom, Google Play has bubble detection  

**Brady Duga:** so we present the entire page, and then increase the size of the text while making it appear still part of the publication  
… useful for low vision, but there is a limit to how big you can make the text  
… also allows you to read the text in order separate from the images, uses region navigation internally to do this  

**Ken Jones:** I read the EUAA article by laurab  
… so should not have a single sensory way of reading the book  
… rather than forcing aspects of a11y in FXL, which is difficult, can we consider a way of reading an FXL that depends on just the text in the document?  

**Wendy Reid:** we talked about this last week, i think, with multiple renditions  
… there's this idea that we shouldn't have separate documents  

**Ken Jones:** i would want it to be a single publication  

**Wendy Reid:** i think we should focus on making sure that whatever is going on behind the FXL IS that textual equivalent  
… in terms of what we say in our best practices, etc. I think that's what we should be aiming for  

**Brady Duga:** about detecting when a book is FXL based on metadata, we kind of do that with our alert to people that certain content is better on large screens  
… but also, just knowing that something is FXL doesn't necessarily tell you how accessible the book itself is  
… don't want to encourage throwing out the good with the bad  

**Wendy Reid:** yes, reflowable books can be really poor from a11y point of view too  

**Brady Duga:** even from RS side, knowing whether a book is FXL or not doesn't say anything about accessibility  

**Ken Jones:** i think we can use Schema accessModes to describe things  

**Wendy Reid:** I'll have an outline of our progress for next week  
… will get in touch with business group re. getting FXL sample content that we can share  
… hopefully BNC can help us with data about FXLs  
… thank you everyone, and thank you Ken!  
… bye everyone!  

---
