---
layout: minutes
date: 2022-03-31
title: EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — 2022-03-31
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": [
            "https://schema.org",
            {
                "resolution": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/resolution",
                    "@context": {
                        "@vocab": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/"
                    }
                },
                "irc": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/irc"
                }
            }
        ],
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2022-03-31-epub",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2022-03-31",
        "irc": "epub",
        "datePublished": "2022-04-01",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
            "startDate": "2022-03-31",
            "endDate": "2022-03-31",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Dave Cramer"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Matthew Chan"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Murata Makoto"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Toshiaki Koike"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Shinya Takami (高見真也)"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Masakazu Kitahara"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Matt Garrish"
                }
            ]
        },
        "resolution": [
            {
                "@type": "Resolution",
                "resolution_number": 1,
                "resolution_text": "Merge Pull Request #2101."
            },
            {
                "@type": "Resolution",
                "resolution_number": 2,
                "resolution_text": "merge PR 2137, close issue 2118."
            }
        ]
    }

---

# EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc .draft_notice_needed}



**Date:** 2022-03-31

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-epub-wg/2022Mar/0020.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2022/03/31-epub-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Dave Cramer, Murata Makoto, Toshiaki Koike, Shinya Takami (高見真也), Masakazu Kitahara, Matthew Chan, Matt Garrish

**Regrets:** Rick Johnson, Wendy Reid, Ben Schroeter

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Dave Cramer

**Scribe(s):** Matthew Chan

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


### 1. Expand and fix resource explanations (pr epub-specs#2101)
{: #section1}

_See github pull request [epub-specs#2101](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/pull/2101)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/2101 -->



> *Dave Cramer:* [https://pr-preview.s3.amazonaws.com/w3c/epub-specs/2101/017a47c...6a76ddc.html#sec-publication-resources](https://pr-preview.s3.amazonaws.com/w3c/epub-specs/2101/017a47c...6a76ddc.html#sec-publication-resources).

**Dave Cramer:** this is a very comprehensive re-working of how we define and explain publication resources.  

**Matt Garrish:** ivan had some diagrams in the PR, and this was also a useful exercise for identifying areas where terminology had gotten kind of wonky.  
… it looks big, but the bulk of the PR is adding an introduction and some examples.  
… ultimately we broke it down to 3 "planes".  
… the top one is _manifest plane_: everything in the container.  
… we had a term called publication resources, which described anything used in rendering, and then we had non-publication resources for everything else.  
… what we've done is to formalize the term linked resource to describe these other resources.  
… moving down from that we have the _spine plane_ and epub content documents.  
… it was kind of a mix, sometimes we called things in the spine publication resources, sometimes we referred to foreign resources.  
… so we've made it either epub content document or foreign content document.  
… finally the lowest level is the _content plane_: everything that gets rendered in an epub content document.  
… this is where CMT and foreign resource live as concepts.  
… and we created a 3rd category of exempt resources that collects together all these exemptions to CMT/fallback rules, e.g. fonts.  
… this PR basically just sets up this understanding and these terminology.  
… ivan went and did an extensive example in the appendix.  
… and how each of the parts of the example would match up to the 3 planes.  
… the rest is just clean-up, to make sure that our use of terminology is consistent, try to weed out places where we previously lacked defined terminology so meaning was muddier.  

**Dave Cramer:** I wish I could wipe my memory of epub and start over with this.  

**Matt Garrish:** yes, it was a really helpful exercise, and discussing without this was very convoluted.  

**Dave Cramer:** yes, I've witnessed confusion because of the lack of terminology.  
… about remote resources, does that concept stay the same as part of this picture?.  

**Matt Garrish:** we described where remote resources exist in the planes, but they aren't a class unto themselves.  
… i don't want to make it so complex in explaining it that we go back into the state of confusion where we were before.  

**Dave Cramer:** right, both remote resources and manifest fallbacks need to serve these other roles.  

**Murata Makoto:** i've been a bit skeptical about the publication resources. Now we have a class of linked resources and publication resources.  
… so now SSML and PLS are publication resources, right?.  

**Matt Garrish:** yes.  

**Murata Makoto:** so rendering means not just visual rendering, but any sort of rendering.  

**Matt Garrish:** publication resources are just the big giant bucket of everything used in rendering the epub, c.f. linked resources which are not directly part of the publication.  

**Dave Cramer:** ancillary to the publication.  

**Murata Makoto:** wondering if we really need the term publication resources, maybe just resource, or resources which are not linked.  

**Matt Garrish:** yeah, but then aren't we just going back to not have a direct term for it? would it conflict with other contexts where people talk about resources?.  

**Murata Makoto:** so you are saying resources within the zip file are one category, and that resources outside the zip file are something else.  

**Matt Garrish:** resources is just a very general term, so i'm worried that it becomes too broad.  
… and part of it is that publication resources is just always the term we've used.  

**Dave Cramer:** resources as a term is so overloaded, i don't think it gains us clarity.  

**Murata Makoto:** not happy with the definition of publication resources because it depends on rendering, which is not well defined in itself.  
… can we say that it is all non-linked resources in the epub?.  
… if some data is used for braille, are they publication resources? I guess so, but it is not so clear.  

**Dave Cramer:** i think we're clear that rendering is anything presented to the user.  

**Murata Makoto:** is that in the spec?.  

**Dave Cramer:** i think it's a term of art in the web/graphics world.  

**Murata Makoto:** before i got involved in a11y, i never thought of braille as rendering.  

**Matt Garrish:** it's still presented to the user.  
… to be honest, use of rendering was intentional, we specifically avoided use of display.  
… not sure how we would define that beyond the common definition of rendering.  

**Murata Makoto:** how about adding a note on the scope of rendering?.  
… specifically referring to braille terminals.  

**Matt Garrish:** that's fine with me, not sure where it would fit, but we could do this.  

**Dave Cramer:** maybe in the terminology section?.  

**Matt Garrish:** we could make a defined term out of it, like 'encompasses all the ways content may be presented, whether visual, tactile, or auditory'.  
… we do define some common terms, so probably no harm in providing some basic definition.  
… just worried about having to link it then (we are supposed to link each term the first time it is used).  
… but we don't have to settle this now.  

**Dave Cramer:** in general i think this is a massive improvement to the legibility of the spec.  
… it's also one of these things that is hard to sort out all the issues before merging it.  
… with big PRs there is always the possibility of typos sneaking in.  
… given broad support for the goals and language here, I propose we merge, and then we can file issues and fix as necessary, as with the definition of rendering above.  

> **Proposed resolution: Merge PR 2101.** *(Dave Cramer)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

**Matt Garrish:** the bulk of this is informative, so likely nothing normative changes as a result of this.  
… doesn't really block move to CR.  

> *Dave Cramer:* +1.

**Murata Makoto:** will we close this issue too?.  

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* +1.

**Dave Cramer:** yes, and then we can open more detailed issues on subsets of this.  

**Matt Garrish:** there's no actual issue, the PR is based on discussions i had with ivan.  

**Murata Makoto:** so nothing wrong with raising smaller issues related to this?.  

**Dave Cramer:** yes.  

**Matt Garrish:** and it's hard to raise issues off a PR.  

> *Matt Garrish:* +1.

> *Murata Makoto:* +1.

**Dave Cramer:** anyone else, please vote now.  

> *Matthew Chan:* +1.

> *Toshiaki Koike:* +1.

> *Masakazu Kitahara:* +1.

> ***Resolution #1: Merge Pull Request #2101.***
{: #resolution1 .resolution}

**Dave Cramer:** mgarrish please merge at your convenience.  

### 2. Remove restriction on mathml deprecated features (pr epub-specs#2137)
{: #section2}

_See github pull request [epub-specs#2137](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/pull/2137)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/2137 -->



_See github issue [epub-specs#2118](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/2118)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/2118 -->



**Matt Garrish:** duga had opened this initially, and we went back and forth.  
… i think his concern is that we're imposing a restriction on MathML's deprecated features that MathML itself doesn't impose on its features.  
… they are deprecated, but you're still allowed to have them in MathML.  
… we are imposing on their spec.  
… he's asked that we not restrict these deprecated features.  
… I agree, and I don't think us putting a ban on MathML features moves the needle on MathML rendering.  
… math rendering is made for web browsers, and we just use what they do.  
… if getting rid of these restrictions smooths over a spec weirdness, that is fine.  
… people don't hand write MathML anyway.  
… so this PR takes out the MUST NOT that was there before.  

**Dave Cramer:** this is in keeping with changes we've been making incrementally over the last 5-10 years.  
… initially we were intervening with the goal of making it easier for people who were trying to write RS from scratch.  
… to allow them to skip support for complicated features.  
… this PR is in keeping with our take on epub as a container for these other technologies.  
… we leave it up to these other specs.  

**Matt Garrish:** I don't think these restrictions work anymore, but they were important at the time.  

**Dave Cramer:** so I would propose we merge this.  

> *Murata Makoto:* +1.

> **Proposed resolution: merge PR 2137, close 2118.** *(Dave Cramer)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Dave Cramer:* +1.

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* +1.

> *Masakazu Kitahara:* +1.

> *Matt Garrish:* +1.

> *Toshiaki Koike:* +1.

> *Matthew Chan:* +1.

> ***Resolution #2: merge PR 2137, close issue 2118.***
{: #resolution2 .resolution}

### 3. REMINDER: Please complete document review by meeting time.
{: #section3}

**Dave Cramer:** if you have signed up as a reviewer, please remember to do so!.  
… we've already gotten a bunch of useful feedback, so thank you to everyone who has reviewed so far.  
… sounds like we are hoping to vote on move to CR at next weeks meeting.  

**Murata Makoto:** you have to close all issues by next week?.  

**Dave Cramer:** no, we are just saying that we've largely finished the technical work, have completed horizontal reviewer, have made related normative changes based on same, have a test plan, and are shifting focus to testing.  
… there will be issues that come up during CR as we open review to community.  
… some issues are marked deferred, and many open issues are editorial in nature.  
… but no expectation that we have zero issues as we go into CR.  
… and due to timing of what W3C management and Director have to do for it, we'd expect to publish around May 5th (there will be publication moratorium in April).  

**Murata Makoto:** when will the upcoming AC meeting be?.  

**Dave Cramer:** I think there is a meeting April 25-26, a virtual meeting.  
… this will cause a little slowdown in publications.  

### 4. Accessibility Usage and Metadata report for CR criteria.
{: #section4}

**Matt Garrish:** we came up with a template for it, and it is currently with Charles to add data from GCA cert publishers.  

**Dave Cramer:** I can follow up with Wendy to clarify what needed to be discussed.  
… and I think just the data from Charles will be sufficient.  

**Matt Garrish:** I think the certifierReport property might be problematic, but other than that, everything else we need is part of GCA certification.  

**Dave Cramer:** we have definitely done some of it in our books.  
… thank you mgarrish for all your work.  
… looking forward to CR!.  

---


### 5. Resolutions
{: #res}

* [Resolution #1](#resolution1): Merge Pull Request #2101.
* [Resolution #2](#resolution2): merge PR 2137, close issue 2118.