---
layout: minutes
date: 2022-12-08
title: EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — 2022-12-08
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": [
            "https://schema.org",
            {
                "resolution": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/resolution",
                    "@context": {
                        "@vocab": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/"
                    }
                },
                "irc": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/irc"
                }
            }
        ],
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2022-12-08-epub",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2022-12-08",
        "irc": "epub",
        "datePublished": "2022-12-09",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
            "startDate": "2022-12-08",
            "endDate": "2022-12-08",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Wendy Reid"
                        },
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Dave Cramer"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Matthew Chan"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "David Hall"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Toshiaki Koike"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Masakazu Kitahara"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Brady Duga"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Shinya Takami (高見真也)"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Matt Garrish"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Murata Makoto"
                }
            ]
        },
        "resolution": [
            {
                "@type": "Resolution",
                "resolution_number": 1,
                "resolution_text": "Defer issue 2491 until evidence of an issue is found."
            }
        ]
    }

---

# EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc .draft_notice_needed}



**Date:** 2022-12-08

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-epub-wg/2022Dec/0007.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2022/12/08-epub-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** David Hall, Wendy Reid, Toshiaki Koike, Dave Cramer, Masakazu Kitahara, Matthew Chan, Brady Duga, Shinya Takami (高見真也), Matt Garrish, Murata Makoto

**Regrets:** 

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Wendy Reid, Dave Cramer

**Scribe(s):** Matthew Chan

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


### 1. Testing Updates.
{: #section1}

**Wendy Reid:** thanks to everyone who submitted test results this week.  
… we have a lot more clarity on how well features are supported.  
… the biggest relief is that the fallback situation is not as bad as we thought.  
… we don't have full support for record linking, changes to dir attribute in package.  
… its a new feature, so that's tricky.  
… and it applies mostly to RS implementations using languages like arabic, hewbrew.  

**Brady Duga:** we're launched in Arabic speaking countries, but most of that is left to the system to decide which direction.  
… we display those titles in the store, but we don't support this setting on these elements.  

**Wendy Reid:** epub css classes didn't make it.  

**Brady Duga:** i'll try to get to that test today.  
… is today the cut off?.  

**Wendy Reid:** no, but it would be good to get results in. We want to be making decisions about these features.  
… the ones with the dashed outline around them are at risk of being under implemented.  
… but none of them make us scared to mark them as under-implemented.  

**Brady Duga:** the ones i was worried about were the MO ones. It's optional, but they are MUSTs..  
… poorly implemented because most of these contain floating text.  

**Wendy Reid:** i had a hard time with our new renderer, but the android tests are incoming, and I think they will pass.  

**Brady Duga:** we don't support floating text, but we would pass if they were fxl books.  

**Wendy Reid:** one of them is fxl.  

**Brady Duga:** it would be weird to mark these at risk.  
… since MO is pretty well supported.  

**Wendy Reid:** we're waiting on more test results from Kobo, and I reached out to Lars re. Colibrio.  
… i have a feeling Colibrio has good support.  
… re. dir attribute we think its only a matter of time/native RS coverage.  
… other tests, like linked records, can get marked under-implemented without devastating consequences.  

**Dave Cramer:** no additional comments.  

**Shinya Takami (高見真也):** ditto.  

**Wendy Reid:** it would be good to have more tests, if only for publishers to be able to see coverage on certain features.  
… it was also eye opening as an implementor to see what did and didn't work.  
… also found bugs in epubcheck using these test.  

**Dave Cramer:** testing is good.  

**Wendy Reid:** i also fixed the tests which were not supposed to have epubcheck errors but did anyway.  

**Dave Cramer:** one of the errors was id values that started with numbers.  
… in the package document tests.  

**Murata Makoto:** this was a holdover from XHTML, a long time ago.  

**Wendy Reid:** for epubcheck, the error message for ids starting with numbers wasn't super clear.  
… the error text was something about a colon.  
… 'check that your id does not start with non-alphanumeric' might be clearer.  

**Matt Garrish:** not sure where it comes from, but epubcheck can overwrite that.  

### 2. consider specifying how EPUB interacts with the MIME sniffing standard (issue epub-specs#2491)
{: #section2}

_See github issue [epub-specs#2491](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/2491)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/2491 -->



**Dave Cramer:** this was pointed out by Romain that as part of the HTML it says you have to determine what kind of resource it is because HTTP headers might be wrong.  
… browsers realized that they might have to figure out what resources really are.  
… every browser did that differently, which resulted in interop issues.  
… so a algorithm was written in a spec.  
… epub doesn't currently say how this should happen.  
… but it doesn't seem like there's a problem we need to solve here.  
… it might be good to clean this up, but adding normative language about this now would delay going to PR.  
… we would need tests, could invalidate implementations.  
… leaning towards leaving it for now.  

**Brady Duga:** agree. There's not a problem..  
… it is specified what should happen, because we have UA, and UAs are supposed to used MIMESNIFF per HTML.  
… one of the inputs to the algorithm is 'specified MIME type', so question is should that be the value from the manifest?.  
… and it seems that that value will get ignored anyway, that's no why it's there.  
… that manifest value is there for fallbacks.  

**Dave Cramer:** given the varieties of approaches that can be taken (e.g. HTTP server, etc.), and do we have to mess with that?.  
… feels like we should not go there unless we're solving an actual interop problem.  

**Matt Garrish:** don't like the idea of pointing out that there is no standard for this until we come up with a solution.  

**Dave Cramer:** i've been working on epub for a decade and I didn't realize the MIMESNIFF was an issue until it was raised.  
… my inclination is not to make any changes now.  

**Matt Garrish:** defer it.  

**Dave Cramer:** if someone can come up with a test that behaves different in different RS, or finds an example in the real world, definitely bring it up in the next round.  

> **Proposed resolution: Defer issue 2491 until evidence of an issue is found.** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Brady Duga:* +1.

> *Dave Cramer:* +1.

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* +1.

> *Wendy Reid:* +1.

> *Matthew Chan:* +1.

> *Matt Garrish:* +1.

> *Toshiaki Koike:* +1.

> *David Hall:* +1.

> ***Resolution #1: Defer issue 2491 until evidence of an issue is found.***
{: #resolution1 .resolution}

> *Dave Cramer:* Makoto: +1.

### 3. What do we do after EPUB 3.3 (living standard, ISO)?.
{: #section3}

> *Murata Makoto:* +present.

**Wendy Reid:** this is about a decisions we have to make as a WG. Do we turn spec into a living standard?.  
… we could publish changes to epub without all the overhead of this initial process. Aimed at addressing errata, clarifications, etc..  
… if we needed to publish a new version that would be a different process.  
… we would need a maintenance working group to do living standard.  
… this group might work on bringing our family of specs to ISO thru PAS process.  

**Murata Makoto:** my motivation is to have ISO standard and W3C standards in sync as far as epub is concerned.  
… ISO has an older version of epub. JIS has version 1.0, meanwhile ISO has epub 3.1 (i think).  
… if we don't submit 3.3 and ally 1.1 to ISO, then some parts of the world will continue to think these old ISO versions are authoritative.  
… to avoid confusion, i think it is very important to submit epub 3.3. and ally 1.1 to be published as ISO standard via PAS.  
… PAS is a very light weight standard, mgarrish will not have to do anything.  
… the ISO will attach a cover page. Like how WCAG 2.0 was published as ISO standard.  
… if ISO members vote to change something, W3C has right to withdraw the submission.  
… so I am quite sure that nobody will try to change epub at that stage. They would rather raise such issues now.  
… if we announce our intention from the beginning, I am quite sure ISO will not try to change anything.  
… if this submission is not made, then I will have a real problem. There are already concerns about differences between a11y 1.0 and 1.1. It is not possible to create epub that conforms to both without some tricks.  
… important for JIS.  
… and important for countries that do not have national standards too.  

**Wendy Reid:** Cristina also mentioned that it would be easier for EU if 3.3 were ISO standard.  
… audiobooks is also a living standard, but only a single errata change has been made in two years.  

**Dave Cramer:** say we publish 3.3 as REC, and there was an ISO version, how easy would it be to re-publish ISO if there were change under living standard?.  

**Murata Makoto:** for Unicode as an example, ISO publish new version every 2 or 3 years, and they can also do amendments to handle errata.  

**Matt Garrish:** a benefit of living standard is that we don't have a backup of errata issues until we do a new version.  
… we can clarify things more quickly.  
… it would be a huge benefit for the standard.  

**Wendy Reid:** there's also an element where it teeters on the edge of errata vs feature change, but that's still lighter weight than the whole CR/PR/REC process.  
… still allows us to balance the necessity of making changes.  

**Matt Garrish:** are there levels of changes that you are allowed to make under living standard before you are required to get approval again?.  

**Wendy Reid:** yes, there are 4 levels of change.  
… 1 and 2 are basically errata. 3 is making your change, followed by AC approval process. 4 is full-on version number change.  
… the errata types are easy to do under living standard.  

**Matt Garrish:** a lot tends to be errata. No expected major feature changes at this point.  

**Wendy Reid:** mgarrish is there anything you need us to consider?.  

**Murata Makoto:** I would like a decision on whether to go ahead with PAS process, though maybe not today.  

**Wendy Reid:** this will be the last meeting for 2022. Next wg meeting will be 1st week of Jan.  
… tentatively we will vote to go to PR then, and i will also throw in vote whether to go to ISO.  
… we will have more information then.  
… is that okay, in terms of notice?.  

**Murata Makoto:** i can contact the iso secretariat for an informal conversation.  

**Dave Cramer:** makes sense to decide after we go to PR.  

### 4. end of the year.
{: #section4}

**Wendy Reid:** okay, this is the last meeting of the year, we'll reconvene next year when we vote for going to PR.  
… if you have test results, please submit them now.  
… tests should be finalized now.  
… have a lovely holiday everyone! Good work!.  

**Dave Cramer:** thanks to wendyreid and mgarrish!.  

**Murata Makoto:** thanks everyone!.  
… and epubcheck implementors.  

**Wendy Reid:** latest version is out now, so please test that too if you haven't.  

**Dave Cramer:** it will be harder to change after its integrated in ingest pipelines.  
… Happy holidays everyone!.  

> *Dave Cramer:* RRSAgent: bye.

---


### 5. Resolutions
{: #res}

* [Resolution #1](#resolution1): Defer issue 2491 until evidence of an issue is found.