---
layout: minutes
date: 2022-03-17
title: EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — 2022-03-17
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": [
            "https://schema.org",
            {
                "resolution": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/resolution",
                    "@context": {
                        "@vocab": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/"
                    }
                },
                "irc": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/irc"
                }
            }
        ],
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2022-03-17-epub",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2022-03-17",
        "irc": "epub",
        "datePublished": "2022-03-18",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
            "startDate": "2022-03-17",
            "endDate": "2022-03-17",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Wendy Reid"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Matthew Chan"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Masakazu Kitahara"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Toshiaki Koike"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Shinya Takami (高見真也)"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Brady Duga"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Murata Makoto"
                }
            ]
        }
    }

---

# EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc .draft_notice_needed}



**Date:** 2022-03-17

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-epub-wg/2022Mar/0011.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2022/03/17-epub-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Masakazu Kitahara, Toshiaki Koike, Shinya Takami (高見真也), Wendy Reid, Brady Duga, Matthew Chan, Murata Makoto

**Regrets:** Ben Schroeter, Dave Cramer, John Foliot

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Wendy Reid

**Scribe(s):** Matthew Chan

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


### 1. Media overlay semantics (issue epub-specs#2066)
{: #section1}

_See github issue [epub-specs#2066](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/2066)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/2066 -->



**Wendy Reid:** you may have noticed a flurry of new issues logged due to people reviewing spec.  
… we have a normative statement that MO SHOULD use semantics when appropriate, and we do not clarify what we mean by semantics, or what semantics to use.  

_See github pull request [epub-specs#2089](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/pull/2089)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/2089 -->



**Wendy Reid:** mgarrish has discussed with danielwreck and marissa, and put together a PR.  
… to clean up the language in that section, particularly dropping SHOULD to MAY.  
… we can't drop the statement altogether, but SHOULD is a little strong in this case.  
… and to specify that we are talking about footnote, endnote, page break.  
… now we have something that could technically be tested (although it is not a required feature, we are discouraging use of epub:type).  
… there is also a small addition to the RS spec to make similar clarifications there.  
… questions?.  

**Murata Makoto:** this changes both Core and RS, right?.  

**Wendy Reid:** yes.  
… the change to RS is barely a change, it keeps the normative statements but offers a little more information about what the RS should be doing.  

**Murata Makoto:** mgarrish dropped one bullet in EPUB 33 core?.  

**Wendy Reid:** he changed one SHOULD to MAY, and both escapability and skippability are better defined. It should be in the PR.  

**Murata Makoto:** seems sensible, but I haven't reviewed the details.  

**Wendy Reid:** to clarify, he dropped the SHOULD, and made the following statement a MAY.  

**Murata Makoto:** no objections, but 4 reviewers have proof read the proposed change?.  

**Wendy Reid:** yes.  
… I didn't know there was a going to be a PR in time for the meeting today, mgarrish was ahead of schedule.  
… we will have to close this issue soon (within the next week or so) so if you have an interest in this please review the PR.  

### 2. Document Review.
{: #section2}

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1qer78BUDpaDb_nav_wuhjeyjMD8Fk7UiakoP2sBf5jc/edit#gid=0](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1qer78BUDpaDb_nav_wuhjeyjMD8Fk7UiakoP2sBf5jc/edit#gid=0).

**Wendy Reid:** in prep for going to CR we are looking to get various members of the CR to review sections of the documents.  
… you need to check for clarity, spelling errors, grammar, etc..  
… mgarrish, Ivan, etc. have touched the document, but its always good to have more eyes on the document.  
… so please volunteer to take sections. Some sections are shorter than others..  
… let's share the load and get through this as quickly as possible.  
… I know not everything is completely comfortable in English, but this is a good opportunity to judge whether we are using clear language.  
… it should be understandable.  

**Brady Duga:** what is our timeline? I am around next week, followed by 2 weeks of vacation.  

**Wendy Reid:** okay, then before you leave please?.  

**Brady Duga:** okay, well, sooner rather than later then.  

**Wendy Reid:** i think there is a publication moratorium early April, so we were hoping to hit end of Mar.  
… not sure why there is a moratorium, maybe there is an AC meeting or something.  

**Murata Makoto:** the JP DAISY consortium has already passed an earlier version of epub a11y, but it should not be difficult for us to review the a11y 1.1 doc.  
… JP DAISY will review that entire spec.  

**Shinya Takami (高見真也):** I will translate for JP members.  

**Wendy Reid:** thank you.  

**Shinya Takami (高見真也):** [in Japanese].  
… I have explained that it will help to review, whether you are strong in english or not.  

> *Murata Makoto:* JDC will raise issues. Both editorial and technical..

**Wendy Reid:** if you claim a section, please place your name in the doc in the agenda.  

### 3. AOB?.
{: #section3}

**Wendy Reid:** okay, thank you all for attending, we will see you all soon!.  

---
