---
layout: minutes
date: 2022-02-03
title: EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — 2022-02-03
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": [
            "https://schema.org",
            {
                "resolution": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/resolution",
                    "@context": {
                        "@vocab": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/"
                    }
                },
                "irc": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/irc"
                }
            }
        ],
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2022-02-03-epub",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2022-02-03",
        "irc": "epub",
        "datePublished": "2022-02-04",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
            "startDate": "2022-02-03",
            "endDate": "2022-02-03",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Dave Cramer"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Matthew Chan"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Toshiaki Koike"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Masakazu Kitahara"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Shinya Takami (高見真也)"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Matt Garrish"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Brady Duga"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Wendy Reid"
                }
            ]
        },
        "resolution": [
            {
                "@type": "Resolution",
                "resolution_number": 1,
                "resolution_text": "Merge PR 1972."
            },
            {
                "@type": "Resolution",
                "resolution_number": 2,
                "resolution_text": "Remove the legal reference from PR 1980, and merge 1980."
            }
        ]
    }

---

# EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc .draft_notice_needed}



**Date:** 2022-02-03

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-epub-wg/2022Feb/0000.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2022/02/03-epub-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Dave Cramer, Toshiaki Koike, Masakazu Kitahara, Shinya Takami (高見真也), Matthew Chan, Matt Garrish, Brady Duga, Wendy Reid

**Regrets:** Ben Schroeter

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Dave Cramer

**Scribe(s):** Matthew Chan

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


**Dave Cramer:** today we are going to continue the talk about security and privacy issues.  

### 1. Review Privacy and Security PR.
{: #section1}

_See github pull request [epub-specs#1972](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/pull/1972)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1972 -->



**Dave Cramer:** first the big PR of the updated security and privacy section.  

> *Dave Cramer:* [https://pr-preview.s3.amazonaws.com/w3c/epub-specs/pull/1972.html#sec-security-privacy](https://pr-preview.s3.amazonaws.com/w3c/epub-specs/pull/1972.html#sec-security-privacy).

> *Dave Cramer:* [https://raw.githack.com/w3c/epub-specs/update/privacy-security/epub33/rs/index.html](https://raw.githack.com/w3c/epub-specs/update/privacy-security/epub33/rs/index.html).

**Dave Cramer:** here are previews of both Core and RS.  
… there have been many changes to this recently.  

**Matt Garrish:** since the last call I've pulled out some of the normative sounding stuff in the privacy and security section, e.g., scripting.  
… there's now 2 new sections under part 2 - 1 about network access (methods to indicate and stop network access), 2 opening external links in a browser.  
… took scripting stuff and moved it back to the scripting section.  
… there were a couple statements that could be normative which were in fact made normative - DOM events, and user control of stored data.  
… the security and privacy section was not really edited otherwise.  

> *Dave Cramer:* [https://raw.githack.com/w3c/epub-specs/update/privacy-security/epub33/rs/index.html#sec-epub-rs-network-access](https://raw.githack.com/w3c/epub-specs/update/privacy-security/epub33/rs/index.html#sec-epub-rs-network-access).

**Matt Garrish:** reflecting push from last call of making the things that could be normative actually normative.  

**Dave Cramer:** super helpful, thank you.  
… link to network access section of RS spec.  
… and right next to that is external links ('RS should open external links in browser to use browser's security features').  
… and these sound testable.  
… comments?.  
… how close is this to what existing RS are doing now?.  

**Wendy Reid:** we (Kobo) pass.  

**Brady Duga:** Google passes.  

**Shinya Takami (高見真也):** I will ask JP participants in Japanese.  
… [addresses JP members].  
… we've discussed with reps from Voyager (browser based RS).  
… Voyager does not support scripting, but they do support remote resources.  
… so we think the additional normative requirements are acceptable for the JP market.  

**Brady Duga:** do the external links open in a new browser window (i.e. new browser context)?.  

**Shinya Takami (高見真也):** i will confirm.  
… [addresses in JP].  
… another browser window will pop-up to view the link.  

**Dave Cramer:** mgarrish do you think this is now in a place where we can merge it?.  

**Matt Garrish:** yes, a lot of this existed prior anyway. We're just making it normative. I would merge now..  
… i think Ivan's last comment said he was happy with it now.  

> **Proposed resolution: Merge PR 1972.** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Wendy Reid:* +1.

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* +1.

> *Matthew Chan:* +1.

> *Brady Duga:* +1.

> *Dave Cramer:* +1.

> *Matt Garrish:* +1.

> *Masakazu Kitahara:* +1.

> *Toshiaki Koike:* +1.

> ***Resolution #1: Merge PR 1972.***
{: #resolution1 .resolution}

**Dave Cramer:** any general comments on this before we move on?  

### 2. Updates to Obfuscation.
{: #section2}

_See github pull request [epub-specs#1980](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/pull/1980)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1980 -->



_See github issue [epub-specs#1873](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1873)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1873 -->



**Dave Cramer:** this is the PR. There's a lot of discussion in the related issue..  
… we've made a bunch of fixes to this.  
… npd asked if we could explain harms of font obfuscation techniques, i.e., interop issues, opacity for end users inspecting what they are reading.  
… but i've never had to inspect font file of epub i'm reading, so i'm not on board with that.  
… could create liability for RS.  
… but i'm not aware of legal issues, or threat of legal issues.  

**Brady Duga:** i'm skeptical of even mentioning legal issues without explicit guidance from lawyers.  
… even the caution that we're currently proposing, not sure what legal implications we are hinting at with that.  
… if I was concerned about legal issues, I would consult my legal team rather than getting it from a spec.  

**Dave Cramer:** i share this concern.  

**Matt Garrish:** yeah, i struggled to come up with a caution that was meaningful.  
… there was talk about DMCA.  
… there are probably legal issues all over the place, so why pick just one.  
… i'm not strongly in favor of this, so I would be okay with removal.  
… stuff on content side is a little less controversial.  

**Dave Cramer:** and some of the other limitations are legitimate.  
… there can be real interop problems, etc..  

> *Wendy Reid:* +1 to general caution.

**Brady Duga:** i'm fine with the general caution.  

**Dave Cramer:** mgarrish can you just remove the legal reference?.  

**Matt Garrish:** yes.  

**Brady Duga:** one other language issue about "designed to break the obfuscation".  
… you're not breaking the obfuscation because its a well defined algorithm.  

**Wendy Reid:** "deobfuscate".  

**Brady Duga:** "intentionally make available"?.  

**Matt Garrish:** agree.  
… on the RS side, do we leave it as SHOULD, or should be go back to MUST support deobfuscation?.  

**Brady Duga:** fine with having it as SHOULD support deobfuscation.  

**Dave Cramer:** fine with leaving it at SHOULD, this is not a core feature.  

> **Proposed resolution: Remove the legal reference from PR 1980, and merge 1980.** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* +1.

> *Wendy Reid:* +1.

> *Toshiaki Koike:* +1.

> *Matthew Chan:* +1.

> *Brady Duga:* +1.

> *Masakazu Kitahara:* +1.

> *Dave Cramer:* +1.

> ***Resolution #2: Remove the legal reference from PR 1980, and merge 1980.***
{: #resolution2 .resolution}

### 3. Discuss Security feedback.
{: #section3}

> *Dave Cramer:* See [last meeting's discussions](https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2022-01-28-epub).

**Dave Cramer:** last meeting we had npd join us to talk through all this.  
… and i think we've already implemented some of the suggestions that came up (i.e. moving some of the normative sounding assertions out of the section, making them normative).  

**Wendy Reid:** is there any remaining thing we still need to address, or are we ready to go back to PING and ask for new review?.  

**Dave Cramer:** there were questions at the end of the call about the `EPUBReadingSystem` object.  

**Wendy Reid:** its common for websites to look at which browser/OS combo users are on.  
… there are websites that say 'sorry, this only works on Chrome' or whatever, but no real equivalent where certain epubs only work on specific RSes.  

**Matt Garrish:** isn't some of this already covered? The issue here is relaying info out via script.  
… the things in scripting section about user consent, etc. seems applicable.  
… not sure why the EPUBReadingSystem object is special case.  

**Wendy Reid:** agree, there is coverage in other areas we discussed.  

**Matt Garrish:** what are we worried that people will do with this? What is the risk of revealing the UA?.  

**Wendy Reid:** if content creators were using that in any way there would be more mobile friendly books.  

**Dave Cramer:** the reality now is that the people who make the epubs don't really know who read them.  
… not seeing what action we could take here.  
… feels like we've gotten feedback from PING, and we've addresses those discussions in these PRs, and will merge them.  
… we can let them tell us if this is satisfactory, or if we need to go for another round of discussion.  
… this is progress.  
… thanks to wendyreid and mgarrish.  

### 4. AOB?.
{: #section4}

**Wendy Reid:** there's a new CG. Interactive Media CG. They are exploring intersection of media, interactivity, and content. e.g. Games on the web.  
… they've reached out to synced media, so i suggested they talk to Publishing as well.  
… i will share in the mailing list.  

**Dave Cramer:** and we're getting closer to CR.  
… cool, thank you everyone for your time, we'll see everyone next week.  

---


### 5. Resolutions
{: #res}

* [Resolution #1](#resolution1): Merge PR 1972.
* [Resolution #2](#resolution2): Remove the legal reference from PR 1980, and merge 1980.
