---
layout: minutes
date: 2022-02-17
title: EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — 2022-02-17
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": [
            "https://schema.org",
            {
                "resolution": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/resolution",
                    "@context": {
                        "@vocab": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/"
                    }
                },
                "irc": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/irc"
                }
            }
        ],
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2022-02-17-epub",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2022-02-17",
        "irc": "epub",
        "datePublished": "2022-02-18",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
            "startDate": "2022-02-17",
            "endDate": "2022-02-17",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Dave Cramer"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Wendy Reid"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Matthew Chan"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Murata Makoto"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Toshiaki Koike"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Masakazu Kitahara"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Wendy Reid"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Brady Duga"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Shinya Takami (高見真也)"
                }
            ]
        },
        "resolution": [
            {
                "@type": "Resolution",
                "resolution_number": 1,
                "resolution_text": "Adopt Brady's suggested text in issue 1483, close issue 1483."
            }
        ]
    }

---

# EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc .draft_notice_needed}



**Date:** 2022-02-17

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-epub-wg/2022Feb/0012.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2022/02/17-epub-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Dave Cramer, Murata Makoto, Toshiaki Koike, Masakazu Kitahara, Wendy Reid, Matthew Chan, Brady Duga, Shinya Takami (高見真也), Wendy Reid

**Regrets:** Ben Schroeter

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Dave Cramer

**Scribe(s):** Matthew Chan

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


### 1. TPAC 2022 Attendance.
{: #section1}

**Wendy Reid:** W3C exploring idea of holding TPAC in person this year in Vancouver, BC, Canada.  
… they've asked all chairs to gauge interest with their wgs.  
… probably impossible to know at this point if people will go, it would be in September.  
… some employers are not allowing corporate travel right now.  
… not sure what situation will be like by September.  

**Dave Cramer:** I hear rumors that they are dropping testing requirements for vaccinated people soon.  
… if at all possible I would go to in person TPAC.  
… given safety, etc..  

**Wendy Reid:** so if everything makes this possible, what is the interest in holding in person TPAC meeting?.  
… it would be a hybrid meeting, by the way.  
… i.e. same as during the before times.  
… with simultaneous in person and online participants.  

**Brady Duga:** assuming all the above, my interest is high.  

**Shinya Takami (高見真也):** not sure about the situation at my company, but I will discuss with our JP members in Japanese.  
… [in Japanese].  
… toshiakikoike says that it would be difficult for him due to health and the covid policy at his company.  
… MasakazuKitahara says it would also be difficult for him, given the current situation.  

**Murata Makoto:** i'm thinking of going to Italy this year for DAISY conference, I am not prohibited from going. But what will be the topic of the meeting there?.  

**Wendy Reid:** still TBD.  

**Brady Duga:** TPAC is happening either way, we're just deciding whether there will be an in person component.  

**Murata Makoto:** in my experience hybrid conferences don't work as well, do you agree?.  

**Wendy Reid:** it's definitely harder, but we've done it for 2 years before covid.  
… we may change the time, i.e. have shorter sessions.  
… maybe 2 mornings, or 2 afternoons, depending on what works for everyone.  
… and a Pacific time zone makes it hard to coordinate meeting times with EU.  
… but we will do our best for everything, and timezones are being considered.  
… they may just be deciding whether they want to keep their reservation at the conference facility.  

**Dave Cramer:** do you have what you need to report back?.  

**Wendy Reid:** yes, I think so!.  

### 2. page progression direction in FXL content documents (issue epub-specs#1483)
{: #section2}

_See github issue [epub-specs#1483](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1483)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1483 -->



**Dave Cramer:** I was a little puzzled by language in the spec around this.  
… there may be a clash of terminology, i.e. `page-progression-direction` attribute from the package doc, CSS's own documentation about page progression, etc..  

**Brady Duga:** I think there was some proposed text at the end of the discussion.  

**Wendy Reid:** "if page progression direction has value other than default, RS must ignore page progression computed from the content".  

**Dave Cramer:** if you don't put page progression direction in package, but you obviously have `rtl` content then it seems strange to say that the RS can't figure that out.  
… so I would support the proposed text.  

**Murata Makoto:** sounds reasonable to me.  

> **Proposed resolution: Adopt Brady's suggested text in issue 1483, close issue 1483.** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Dave Cramer:* +1.

> *Wendy Reid:* +1.

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* +1.

> *Brady Duga:* +1.

> *Toshiaki Koike:* +1.

> *Matthew Chan:* +1.

> *Masakazu Kitahara:* +1.

> ***Resolution #1: Adopt Brady's suggested text in issue 1483, close issue 1483.***
{: #resolution1 .resolution}

### 3. FXL Limitations.
{: #section3}

_See github issue [epub-specs#1733](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1733)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1733 -->



_See github issue [epub-specs#1736](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1736)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1736 -->



**Wendy Reid:** not a lot of discussion on these, but they are still open, so we want to mention.  
… gpellegrino did review of a11y documentation last year.  
… he raised 2 issues specifically about FXL a11y.  
… one is about there being limitations on FXL a11y right now, not able to make fully accessible FXL document right now.  
… other one is about accessibility and orientation, there will be a note in best practices that blocking orientation can impede readability.  
… if no comments, both gpellgrino's comments will be reflected in note.  

**Dave Cramer:** my understanding is that the problem which cannot be avoided in making FXL accessible content is that font size is fixed.  
… is there accessibility metadata around there?.  

**Wendy Reid:** i think so, but I can't recall specific accessibility hazard text at the moment.  
… but yes, inability to modify text size, font face.  
… we will be mapping some of the statements in the best practice note to WCAG - one of these is about scrolling, i.e. having to scroll both horizontally and vertically to read content if zoomed in.  

**Dave Cramer:** i could definitely make an FXL that doesn't specify fonts, but not sure if RS would allow user to choose a font.  

**Brady Duga:** no, the whole point of FXL is that you're not supposed to change that.  

**Dave Cramer:** does the CSS positioning spec say that you can use these things to make inaccessible documents?.  

**Wendy Reid:** there is an accessibility feature call display transformability, but not corresponding accessibility hazard for no display transformability.  
… but I will ask authors of a11y spec.  

**Dave Cramer:** historically epub has allowed a lot of different ways to achieve a particular goal, and we've never taken the position that every epub must be accessible to every user.  
… for example, standard alone audio books are very useful for accessibility, but also useless to a specific segment of people.  
… this seems like we're taking a step towards saying FXL is an invalid way of presenting content to users.  

**Wendy Reid:** this is all non-normative, but i'm phrasing the note as "the limits of FXL a11y".  
… it is possible to do a lot of a11y work for a lot of people, but there are limitations that make it so that some segments will not be served.  

**Shinya Takami (高見真也):** right now we do not have requirement to make epub accessible, so it will be hard to realize accessible epubs i think.  

**Wendy Reid:** isn't a version of epub a11y 1.1 adopted as JIS standard?.  

**Murata Makoto:** it will be later this year, in aug/sep.  

**Dave Cramer:** okay, what wendyreid has proposed sounds good to me.  

### 4. Wording of Affordance.
{: #section4}

_See github issue [epub-specs#1961](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1961)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1961 -->



**Wendy Reid:** i think the only question is, Makoto, is it okay to go with the last suggested text from mgarrish on the issue?.  

**Murata Makoto:** different people have different understanding of the word affordance, so let's use something else.  

**Wendy Reid:** I think mgarrish suggested some form of "alternatives".  

**Murata Makoto:** George suggested "available features".  

**Wendy Reid:** mgarrish suggested that in the specific text we're talking about "alternatives" might work.  

> An EPUB Publication can have more than one set of sufficient access modes depending on the alternatives provided to enable reading in another mode..

**Dave Cramer:** I like that wording.  

**Murata Makoto:** there are two instances of the word "affordance". Will we fix both?.  

**Wendy Reid:** the other is in the explanation for `accessModeSufficient`.  

> *Wendy Reid:* "this property takes into account any affordances for content that is not broadly accessible".

**Wendy Reid:** so yes, I think using "alternatives" here makes sense too.  

**Murata Makoto:** thank you!.  

### 5. AOB.
{: #section5}

**Wendy Reid:** I think that was it.  
… we're working our way through the issue list.  
… we have some testing issues, security and privacy, MO.  
… for security and privacy I've reached out to our 2 reviewers for feedback.  

**Dave Cramer:** looks like we could be in CR soon.  
… okay, thank you everyone.  

---


### 6. Resolutions
{: #res}

* [Resolution #1](#resolution1): Adopt Brady's suggested text in issue 1483, close issue 1483.
