---
layout: minutes
date: 2022-05-26
title: EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — 2022-05-26
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": [
            "https://schema.org",
            {
                "resolution": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/resolution",
                    "@context": {
                        "@vocab": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/"
                    }
                },
                "irc": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/irc"
                }
            }
        ],
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2022-05-26-epub",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2022-05-26",
        "irc": "epub",
        "datePublished": "2022-05-27",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
            "startDate": "2022-05-26",
            "endDate": "2022-05-26",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Dave Cramer"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Matthew Chan"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Toshiaki Koike"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Masakazu Kitahara"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Shinya Takami (高見真也)"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Wendy Reid"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Matt Garrish"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Dan Lazin"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Brady Duga"
                }
            ]
        },
        "resolution": [
            {
                "@type": "Resolution",
                "resolution_number": 1,
                "resolution_text": "Approve PR 2297."
            },
            {
                "@type": "Resolution",
                "resolution_number": 2,
                "resolution_text": "Approve PR 2299, close issue 2265."
            },
            {
                "@type": "Resolution",
                "resolution_number": 3,
                "resolution_text": "Approve PR 2301, close issue 2264."
            }
        ]
    }

---

# EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc .draft_notice_needed}



**Date:** 2022-05-26

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-epub-wg/2022May/0048.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2022/05/26-epub-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Toshiaki Koike, Dave Cramer, Masakazu Kitahara, Matthew Chan, Shinya Takami (高見真也), Wendy Reid, Matt Garrish, Dan Lazin, Brady Duga

**Regrets:** 

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Dave Cramer

**Scribe(s):** Matthew Chan

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


**Dave Cramer:** welcome all to this post-CR meeting.  
… this means that our highest priority is testing.  
… but we also have some issues around privacy and security.  
… which we will discuss today.  

### 1. Security and Privacy issues.
{: #section1}

#### 1.1. Making statements normative.
{: #section1-1}

_See github pull request [epub-specs#2297](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/pull/2297)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/2297 -->



**Dave Cramer:** one of the key elements of the feedback was that most of our security and privacy section was non-normative, and Nick thought it should be.  
… this PR makes that change so that many of the things we discussed non-normative have become normative, but still _SHOULD_.  
… reading through this PR, it seems to be a better statement of our values and the importance of privacy and security.  

**Matt Garrish:** this also addresses concern re. unsigned epubs and whether RS can trust such epubs.  
… not sure how to phrase, because unsigned doesn't necessarily mean untrustworthy.  
… language now gives a lot of leeway to RS.  
… can't necessarily be enforced, but still good practice that we are now throwing our weight behind.  

**Dave Cramer:** still significant progress versus previous versions of epub on this.  

**Wendy Reid:** we can't merge anything right now because we have it set so that it auto publishes after a merge.  
… we need to figure out if we need a new snapshot.  

> **Proposed resolution: Approve PR 2297.** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Dave Cramer:* +1.

> *Matt Garrish:* +1.

> *Matthew Chan:* +1.

> *Dan Lazin:* +1.

> *Toshiaki Koike:* +1.

> *Wendy Reid:* +1.

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* +1.

> *Brady Duga:* +1.

> *Masakazu Kitahara:* +1.

> ***Resolution #1: Approve PR 2297.***
{: #resolution1 .resolution}

#### 1.2. External Resources should be loaded securely.
{: #section1-2}

_See github issue [epub-specs#2263](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/2263)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/2263 -->



_See github pull request [epub-specs#2299](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/pull/2299)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/2299 -->



**Dave Cramer:** this issue comes with this PR.  
… this is around remote resources, and recommended that they be served over HTTPS.  
… avoiding person in the middle and other such network attacks.  

**Dan Lazin:** my only concern is the PR itself is not super clear in its language.  
… "RS may not load resources".  
… what we mean is there is a chance RS may not load.  
… I'll do a pass.  

**Dave Cramer:** this is _SHOULD_ level, so would we test whether a remote resource is served via HTTP, and that would result in a warning from epubcheck?.  

**Matt Garrish:** yes, that is what I would expect.  

**Dave Cramer:** this could affect existing content, but I expect it would be rare.  

**Matt Garrish:** generally the direction of the web is HTTPS too.  
… this will cause some warnings, but security outweighs. We should move in the direction of the web.  

**Dave Cramer:** using backwards compatibility as reason not to fix security issue isn't where we want to be.  

> **Proposed resolution: Approve PR 2299, close issue 2265.** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Brady Duga:* +1.

> *Wendy Reid:* +1.

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* +1.

> *Matthew Chan:* +1.

> *Masakazu Kitahara:* +1.

> *Dan Lazin:* +1.

> *Dave Cramer:* +1.

> *Toshiaki Koike:* +1.

> *Matt Garrish:* +1.

> ***Resolution #2: Approve PR 2299, close issue 2265.***
{: #resolution2 .resolution}

#### 1.3. Authenticity and Integrity checks.
{: #section1-3}

_See github issue [epub-specs#2265](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/2265)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/2265 -->



**Dave Cramer:** we did add a section about this in the previously approved PR 2297.  
… XML signatures does support signing of the epub.  
… so there is a mechanism for this, but i'm not aware of an epub RS that supports signing or that would alert end user/do something else if faced with signed epub where signature is invalid.  

**Brady Duga:** an attacker could just re-sign the epub with their own signature. RS can't know what signature should be.  

**Dave Cramer:** so should we just note that we have a signature capability, but given the nature of epub it is tough to ascertain a chain of trust even though it is possible on the web?.  

**Brady Duga:** the PR itself looks fine.  
… do we have to resolve all issues, right? And the raiser must be happy with resolution? This is part of CR transition?.  

**Wendy Reid:** yes.  
… we can close the issue, and then make sure that PR gets an okay from security and privacy reviewers.  

#### 1.4. Review of issues in “Reading Between the Lines".
{: #section1-4}

_See github issue [epub-specs#2266](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/2266)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/2266 -->



> *Dave Cramer:* See [(academic) paper on EPUB Security](https://lirias.kuleuven.be/retrieve/616428).

**Dave Cramer:** this is a paywalled academic paper, link is to the author's own website.  
… they tested close to 100 epub RS, with some automated tests of security issues (e.g. scripting). Concluded with a few recommendations on how to change the spec.  
… I've looked at it briefly.  
… we were talking earlier about remote resources, but it seems that we allow use of local resources, which may be a significant security hole.  
… it also mentioned that half of RS that supported javascript supported geolocation, etc..  
… they say it wasn't mentioned in spec, but it should be covered by our recommendation for soliciting user consent.  
… I think several of us need to review issues raised in it.  

**Wendy Reid:** mgarrish gave good summary of points in issue.  
… authors make some suggestions around the support of javascript and that the spec should specify no access to local file system.  
… but we've always strayed from explicitly telling RS how to build an RS.  
… their points are valid, and the RSs featured should take those issues up.  
… rather than changes that should be made in the spec itself.  

**Dan Lazin:** should we invite them to give us a presentation and some recommendations?.  

**Dave Cramer:** I like the idea of having a dialog with them. They seem interested and knowledgeable.  

**Wendy Reid:** I also like the idea.  

**Dave Cramer:** good topic for next chairs call.  

**Brady Duga:** +1.  
… also re access to file system, does that mean you can't access the epub? Difficult not to be overly broad in prohibitions.  

**Matt Garrish:** this is why I didn't try to write a PR to answer this one.  
… their main point of contention is `file:` URLs right?.  
… we can block those in authoring without breaking epub.  
… trickier on RS side.  
… we talk in theory about how `file:` URLs could be used, but does anyone even do this in reality?.  

> *Dave Cramer:* `<xi:include href=file:://usr/passwd>`.

**Matt Garrish:** if there was a way to block that I personally wouldn't take issue, but the language would be tricky from RS perspective.  

**Wendy Reid:** I've found the authors of the paper online.  

**Dave Cramer:** that's a great way forward on this issue.  
… we could probably learn from each other.  

#### 1.5. Persistent storage security.
{: #section1-5}

_See github pull request [epub-specs#2301](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/pull/2301)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/2301 -->



_See github issue [epub-specs#2264](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/2264)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/2264 -->



**Dave Cramer:** about unrelated documents.  

**Matt Garrish:** this is about two requirements that were still in the spec, but which are no longer applicable.  
… i.e., language around each document being treated as its own domain.  
… if you absolutely need to use persistent storage, then we recommend you encrypt instead of storing as plaintext.  

**Dave Cramer:** a lot of people have done proofs of concept of drafting epubs that can read data from local storage created by a different epub.  

**Matt Garrish:** not sure if javascript encrypting is trivial to break or not, but at least we are saying to pay attention to this.  
… we also recommend just not storing sensitive data in the first place, if you don't have to.  

> **Proposed resolution: Approve PR 2301, close issue 2264.** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Dave Cramer:* +1.

> *Matt Garrish:* +1.

> *Brady Duga:* +1.

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* +1.

> *Wendy Reid:* +1.

> *Dan Lazin:* +1.

> *Toshiaki Koike:* +1.

> *Matthew Chan:* +1.

> *Masakazu Kitahara:* +1.

> ***Resolution #3: Approve PR 2301, close issue 2264.***
{: #resolution3 .resolution}

### 2. Testing.
{: #section2}

#### 2.1. Standardize formatting of mol-navigation.
{: #section2-1}

_See github pull request [epub-tests#148](https://github.com/w3c/epub-tests/pull/148)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-tests/148 -->



**Dan Lazin:** this is a discussion of a comment in the PR.  
… this was a test for MO, and this was a test for a _MUST_ within the MO section (which is a _SHOULD_).  
… Ivan has created a way to filter should tests, so that, for example, a tester could say "i'm not worried about the 'should' tests".  
… but in order for us to determine whether the spec is implementable, the _MUST_s within the should sections are still important.  
… we need to have 2 independent implementations of these _MUST-s_ too.  
… so what is the purpose of marking some tests as should, and based on the answer to same, how do we treat _MUST-s_ in _SHOULD_ sections?.  

**Dave Cramer:** do we have this problem on a higher level? If we allow possibility of audio only RS, then anything related to visual only is not required.  

**Dan Lazin:** that's the opposite of this, because those tests would not be marked as _SHOULD-s_, and could not be accidentally filtered out.  

**Dave Cramer:** so in some sense we may need to leave it up to the RS dev, e.g. if the RS in question doesn't support MO.  

**Matt Garrish:** so we're concerned about how to handle filtering? Can Ivan just fix this in the filtering script?.  

**Dan Lazin:** I think its what is the purpose of marking a test as a should test? Are we telling RS tester not to worry about this? Or are we telling Director not to worry about this?.  
… I think purpose of our tests is CR. So I would think we do NOT mark such tests as should tests.  
… maybe we should defer this until Ivan is here, this isn't urgent.  

**Brady Duga:** yes, fine to defer. But it seems these tests are going to be marked as _MUST-s_ because they ARE _MUST-s_..  
… otherwise they would just be _SHOULD_ in the spec.  

**Wendy Reid:** I would be more worried about this if it wasn't in a feature like MO that is already fairly well supported.  
… could some of the more technical features of MO be at risk? Sure. But the core feature of MO I'm not worried about.  

**Dan Lazin:** hearing duga's reply, and no disagreements, I'm tending towards not flagging them as should tests. I don't think Ivan feels strongly, but we can follow up with him next meeting.  

**Wendy Reid:** I'll wait for the PR for us to resolve.  

### 3. AOB?.
{: #section3}

**Brady Duga:** don't accidentally sign up for the wrong TPAC conference!.  

**Wendy Reid:** there's a name conflict. 2 conferences named TPAC in Vancouver at the same time.  

**Dan Lazin:** within a few days W3C will link us to a block of discount TPAC hotels.  

**Dave Cramer:** the information is forthcoming.  
… okay, that wraps us up, thanks everyone!.  

---


### 4. Resolutions
{: #res}

* [Resolution #1](#resolution1): Approve PR 2297.
* [Resolution #2](#resolution2): Approve PR 2299, close issue 2265.
* [Resolution #3](#resolution3): Approve PR 2301, close issue 2264.
