---
layout: minutes
date: 2022-03-03
title: EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — 2022-03-03
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": [
            "https://schema.org",
            {
                "resolution": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/resolution",
                    "@context": {
                        "@vocab": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/"
                    }
                },
                "irc": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/irc"
                }
            }
        ],
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2022-03-03-epub",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2022-03-03",
        "irc": "epub",
        "datePublished": "2022-03-04",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
            "startDate": "2022-03-03",
            "endDate": "2022-03-03",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Dave Cramer"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Brady Duga"
                        },
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Wendy Reid"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Toshiaki Koike"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Masakazu Kitahara"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Shinya Takami (高見真也)"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Matt Garrish"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Dan Lazin"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Zheng Xu (徐征)"
                }
            ]
        },
        "resolution": [
            {
                "@type": "Resolution",
                "resolution_number": 1,
                "resolution_text": "Merge PR 2027 after wording is confirmed, and close issue 2007."
            },
            {
                "@type": "Resolution",
                "resolution_number": 2,
                "resolution_text": "Merge PR 2028, close issue 2024."
            }
        ]
    }

---

# EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc .draft_notice_needed}



**Date:** 2022-03-03

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-epub-wg/2022Mar/0000.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2022/03/03-epub-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Dave Cramer, Toshiaki Koike, Masakazu Kitahara, Brady Duga, Wendy Reid, Shinya Takami (高見真也), Matt Garrish, Dan Lazin, Zheng Xu (徐征)

**Regrets:** Matthew Chan, BenShroeter

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Dave Cramer

**Scribe(s):** Brady Duga, Wendy Reid

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


### 1. 'duration' value in MO and TTS (issue epub-specs#2007)
{: #section1}

_See github issue [epub-specs#2007](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/2007)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/2007 -->



**Dave Cramer:** Duration values in TTS.  

_See github pull request [epub-specs#2027](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/pull/2027)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/2027 -->



**Dave Cramer:** see issue and pull request.  
… historically we required a duration value for MO, but there is a question about what happens when there is no accompanying audio.  
… which means TTS will render the paragraph.  
… We are acknowledging it isn't common, but we need to cover it in the spec.  
… Matt, summary?.  

**Matt Garrish:** Not much to say, but the spec is a little wordy/redundant.  
… I suggest shortening, but overall am happy.  

**Dave Cramer:** Some comment about making the duration a 'should', but I am against that.  

**Matt Garrish:** agreed. I am not even sure how common TTS is.  

**Dave Cramer:** And you won't have MO if you are relying on TTS anyway.  

**Wendy Reid:** Using MO for TTS is pretty much overkill.  
… European A11y act requires TTS in RSes, so TTS will be more common.  

**Matt Garrish:** We did TTS previously, but not as MO. Seems like this is more theoretical than anything. Happy to leave as is.  

**Murata Makoto:** DAISY in Japan has MO always, but it is pre-recorded.  

**Dave Cramer:** We will clean up the PR and close the issue.  

> **Proposed resolution: Merge PR 2027 after wording is confirmed, and close issue 2007.** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Matt Garrish:* +1.

> *Dave Cramer:* +1.

> *Toshiaki Koike:* +1.

> *Wendy Reid:* +1.

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* +1.

> *Masakazu Kitahara:* +1.

> *Zheng Xu (徐征):* +1.

> *Brady Duga:* +1.

> *Dan Lazin:* +1.

> *Murata Makoto:* +1.

> ***Resolution #1: Merge PR 2027 after wording is confirmed, and close issue 2007.***
{: #resolution1 .resolution}

### 2. Adding a note to the section on OCF URL resolutions (issue epub-specs#2023)
{: #section2}

_See github issue [epub-specs#2023](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/2023)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/2023 -->



**Dave Cramer:** Major rewrite of OCF to clarify URLs.  
… Partly to help clarify where relative URLs could reach (that is, not out of the package).  
… First issue is to clarify in simple language what is legal now.  
… I am in favor of clarifying.  

**Dan Lazin:** Not sure what Ivan wants.  
… Is he asking for an example? Or something else?.  

**Dave Cramer:** I think an example of two explaining why these things are bad makes sense.  

**Matt Garrish:** I think Ivan wants some plain English explaining what all this means without having to understand the processing model.  

**Dave Cramer:** Maybe just "you can't use URLs like this and that", etc.  

**Murata Makoto:** I am concerned between discrepancies our spec and whatwg.  
… Which could change any time.  

**Dave Cramer:** This is a non-normative section.  

**Murata Makoto:** I am concerned with the entire section. Maybe a new issue is needed?.  

**Matt Garrish:** This is epub specific to handle the case of the virtual container.  

**Brady Duga:** I think when we were looking at this, I don't think we're changing anything the URL spec says.  
… we're putting some constraints on behaviours of types of URLs you can use as base.  
… it is still worth you going through it.  

**Dave Cramer:** It looks messy because it is a hard problem and it very tricky to fully explain (using formal language).  
… This is our best attempt to use the URL spec language and concepts to define what we want.  
… But please do review and file issues.  

**Murata Makoto:** And this issue would and non-normative language?.  

**Dave Cramer:** Yes.  

**Wendy Reid:** Yes.  

**Dave Cramer:** Not really ready to have a resolution - someone needs to add language.  

**Murata Makoto:** This is not the first time I have encountered this problem, and specifying it is very difficult.  

### 3. Clarify that resources must be present for relative paths (issue epub-specs#2024)
{: #section3}

_See github issue [epub-specs#2024](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/2024)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/2024 -->



**Dave Cramer:** Our other issue is similar. When we did this we lost a requirement that there be a resource at the end of the path.  
… originally we had 1. not leak and 2. must exist.  

_See github pull request [epub-specs#2028](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/pull/2028)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/2028 -->



**Dave Cramer:** We lost part 2. We should put it back. There is already a PR.  

**Matt Garrish:** We just need to put the existence text back.  

**Dave Cramer:** Yes, and it sounds like the PR does just that.  
… I am in favor of merging.  

**Dan Lazin:** I don't know if it follows that there must always be a thing that is referenced.  
… For instance a book on how to write epub that shows errors (eg this is what it looks like when a resource is missing).  
… The cases are rare, but I can imagine some.  
… and there are plenty of ways to create bad content.  

**Wendy Reid:** Going with must on this, because nothing stops people from ignoring epubcheck.  
… In general epubcheck is heavily relied on by publishers to tell them of problems.  
… and this will more often than not help those publishers find problems.  

**Matt Garrish:** I basically agree with wendyreid.  
… epubcheck does look for this now.  
… There are other things epubcheck will flag.  
… This seems like a can of worms to change, and error has worked really well to date.  

**Dan Lazin:** Those are persuasive arguments.  
… I thought epubcheck gave warnings on shoulds, isn't that good enough?.  

**Wendy Reid:** Errors scare them more.  

**Dan Lazin:** I am ok with must, but odd that epubcheck is preflight and a conformance checker.  

> **Proposed resolution: Merge PR 2028, close issue 2024.** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

**Dave Cramer:** Propose merging 2028.  

> *Dave Cramer:* +1.

> *Matt Garrish:* +1.

> *Dan Lazin:* +1.

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* +1.

> *Brady Duga:* +1.

> *Wendy Reid:* +1.

> *Zheng Xu (徐征):* +1.

> *Toshiaki Koike:* +1.

> ***Resolution #2: Merge PR 2028, close issue 2024.***
{: #resolution2 .resolution}

**Dave Cramer:** AOB?.  

### 4. Accessibility of image-dominated FXL publications (issue epub-specs#2012)
{: #section4}

_See github issue [epub-specs#2012](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/2012)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/2012 -->



**Shinya Takami (高見真也):** FL a11y issue was raised (see issue).  
… MURATA, what do you think?.  

**Murata Makoto:** I do not understand the practical implications.  

**Shinya Takami (高見真也):** (Japanese).  

**Murata Makoto:** Informational document (Japanese).  
… DAISY (Japanese).  

**Shinya Takami (高見真也):** (Japanese).  

**Murata Makoto:** Yes.  
… Will this have any impact on 3.3?.  

**Wendy Reid:** No.  
… These are not published, and would only be WG notes, neither on REC track.  
… We can add something about image dominated publications (or add more).  
… We have been trying to avoid discussing a single content type, but we can attempt to differentiate between mainly image FL and text based FL.  

**Murata Makoto:** I would like to make this more obvious - Image based FL content is not accessible. Period..  

**Wendy Reid:** We wouldn't really put this into core anyway, it would be part of a11y if we did add it.  
… There are a lot of problems, and we really can't standardize yet.  

**Dave Cramer:** Looks like we have a path forward.  
… AOB.  

**Dan Lazin:** I heard back from MDN today, they have approved our proposals to add publishing related content at MDN.  
… Now we just have to write the docs.  

> *Dan Lazin:* See ["Web-related technologies" on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Related).

**Dan Lazin:** We have an outline for minimum viable, but not time to actually do it now.  

> *Dan Lazin:* See [first outline](https://github.com/dlazin/mdn-yari/blob/main/kumascript/macros/EPUBRef.ejs).

**Dan Lazin:** but we do have an outline if anyone wants to help.  

**Zheng Xu (徐征):** In the CG we have a taskforce for MDN, can we assign it to you?.  

**Dan Lazin:** Yes, I knew it existed and the TF connected me to the MDN people.  

**Zheng Xu (徐征):** I will add you to the CG issue.  

**Dan Lazin:** I do have the previous drafts.  

> *Zheng Xu (徐征):* here is the CG issue.

_See github issue [publishingcg#10](https://github.com/w3c/publishingcg/issues/10)._

<!-- issue w3c/publishingcg/10 -->



**Dave Cramer:** The MDN format is weird.  

---


### 5. Resolutions
{: #res}

* [Resolution #1](#resolution1): Merge PR 2027 after wording is confirmed, and close issue 2007.
* [Resolution #2](#resolution2): Merge PR 2028, close issue 2024.
